The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving
memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even
myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes
again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet
to come, an Age long past, a wind rose on the great plain
called the Caralain Grass. The wind was not the beginning.
There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the
Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.
North and east the wind blew beneath early morning sun,
over endless miles of rolling grass and far-scattered thickets,
across the swift-flowing River Luan, past the broken-topped
fang of Dragonmount, mountain of legend towering above the
slow swells of the rolling plain, looming so high that clouds
wreathed it less than halfway to the smoking peak.
Dragonmount, where the Dragon had died—and with him,
some said, the Age of Legends—where prophecy said he would
be born again. Or had been. North and east, across the
villages of Jualdhe and Darein and Alindaer, where bridges like
stone lacework arched out to the Shining Walls, the great white
walls of what many called the greatest city in the world. Tar
Valon. A city just touched by the reaching shadow of
Dragonmount each evening.
Within those walls Ogier-made buildings well over two thousand years old seemed to grow out of the ground rather
than having been built, or to be the work of wind and water
rather than that of even the fabled hands of Ogier
stone-masons. Some suggested birds taking flight, or huge shells
from distant seas. Soaring towers, flared or fluted or spiraled,
stood connected by bridges hundreds of feet in the air, often
without rails. Only those long in Tar Valon could avoid gaping
like country folk who had never been off the farm.
Greatest of those towers, the White Tower dominated the city,
gleaming like polished bone in the sun. The Wheel of Time
turns around Tar Valon, so people said in the city, and Tar
Valon turns around the Tower
. The first sight travelers had
of Tar Valon, before their horses came in view of the bridges,
before their river boat captains sighted the island, was the
Tower reflecting the sun like a beacon. Small wonder then that
the great square surrounding the walled Tower grounds
seemed smaller than it was under the massive Tower’s gaze,
the people in it dwindling to insects. Yet the White Tower could
have been the smallest in Tar Valon, the fact that it was the
heart of Aes Sedai power would still have overawed the island
city.
Despite their numbers, the crowd did not come close to filling
the square. Along the edges people jostled each other in a
milling mass, all going about their day’s business, but closer to
the Tower grounds there were ever fewer people, until a band
of bare paving stones at least fifty paces wide bordered the tall
white walls. Aes Sedai were respected and more in Tar Valon,
of course, and the Amyrlin Seat ruled the city as she ruled the
Aes Sedai, but few wanted to be closer to Aes Sedai power
than they had to. There was a difference between being proud
of a grand fireplace in your hall and walking into the flames.
A very few did go closer, to the broad stairs that led up to
the Tower itself, to the intricately carved doors wide enough for
a dozen people abreast. Those doors stood open, welcoming.
There were always some people in need of aid or an answer
they thought only Aes Sedai could give, and they came from
far as often as near, from Arafel and Ghealdan, from Saldaea
and Illian. Many would find help or guidance inside, though
often not what they had expected or hoped for.
Min kept the wide hood of her cloak pulled up, shadowing her face in its depths. In spite of the warmth of the day, the
garment was light enough not to attract comment, not on a
woman so obviously shy. And a good many people were shy
when they went to the Tower. There was nothing about her to
attract notice. Her dark hair was longer than when she was
last in the Tower, though still not quite to her shoulders, and
her dress, plain blue except for narrow bands of white
Jaerecruz lace at neck and wrists, would have suited the
daughter of a well-to-do farmer, wearing her feastday best to
the Tower just like the other women approaching the wide
stairs. Min hoped she looked the same, at least. She had to
stop herself from staring at them to see if they walked or held
themselves differently. I can do it, she told herself.
She had certainly not come all this way to turn back now.
The dress was a good disguise. Those who remembered her in
the Tower remembered a young woman with close-cropped
hair, always in a boy’s coat and breeches, never in a dress. It
had to be a good disguise. She had no choice about what she
was doing. Not really.
Her stomach fluttered the closer she came to the Tower, and
she tightened her grip on the bundle clutched to her breast.
Her usual clothes were in there, and her good boots, and all
her possessions except the horse she had left at an inn not
far from the square. With luck, she would be back on the
gelding in a few hours, riding for the Ostrein Bridge and the
road south.
She was not really looking forward to climbing onto a horse
again so soon, not after weeks in the saddle with never a
day’s pause, but she longed to leave this place. She had never
seen the White Tower as hospitable, and right now it seemed
nearly as awful as the Dark One’s prison at Shayol Ghul.
Shivering, she wished she had not thought of the Dark One. I
wonder if Moiraine thinks I came just because she asked
me? The Light help me, acting like a fool girl. Doing fool
things because of a fool man!
She mounted the stairs uneasily—each was deep enough to
take two strides for her to reach the next—and unlike most of
the others, she did not pause for an awed stare up the pale
height of the Tower. She wanted this over. Inside, archways almost surrounded the large, round entry
hall, but the petitioners huddled in the middle of the chamber,
shuffling together beneath a flat-domed ceiling. The pale stone
floor had been worn and polished by countless nervous feet
over the centuries. No one thought of anything except where
they were, and why. A farmer and his wife in rough woolens,
clutching each other’s callused hands, rubbed shoulders with a
merchant in velvet-slashed silks, a maid at her heels clutching a
small worked-silver casket, no doubt her mistress’s gift for the
Tower. Elsewhere, the merchant would have stared down her
nose at farm folk who brushed so close, and they might well
have knuckled their foreheads and backed away apologizing.
Not now. Not here.
There were few men among the petitioners, which was no
surprise to Min. Most men were nervous around Aes Sedai.
Everyone knew it had been male Aes Sedai, when there still
had been male Aes Sedai, who were responsible for the
Breaking of the World. Three thousand years had not dimmed
that memory, even if time had altered many of the details.
Children were still frightened by tales of men who could
channel the One Power, men doomed to go mad from the
Dark One’s taint on saidin, the male half of the True Source.
Worst was the story of Lews Therin Telamon, the Dragon,
Lews Therin Kinslayer, who had begun the Breaking. For that
matter, the stories frightened adults, too. Prophecy said the
Dragon would be born again in mankind’s greatest hour of
need, to fight the Dark One in Tarmon Gai’don, the Last
Battle, but that made little difference in how most people
looked at any connection between men and the Power. Any
Aes Sedai would hunt down a man who could channel, now;
of the seven Ajahs, the Red did little else.
Of course, none of that had anything to do with seeking help
from Aes Sedai, yet few men felt easy about being linked in
any way to Aes Sedai and the Power. Few, that is, except
Warders, but each Warder was bonded to an Aes Sedai;
Warders could hardly be taken for the general run of men.
There was a saying: “A man will cut off his own hand to get
rid of a splinter before asking help from Aes Sedai.” Women
meant it as a comment on men’s stubborn foolishness, but Min
had heard some men say the loss of a hand might be the
better decision. She wondered what these people would do if they knew what
she knew. Run screaming, perhaps. And if they knew her
reason for being here, she might not survive to be taken up
by the Tower guards and thrown into a cell. She did have
friends in the Tower, but none with power or influence. If her
purpose was discovered, it was much less likely that they could
help her than that she would pull them to the gallows or the
headsman behind her. That was saying she lived to be tried, of
course; more likely her mouth would be stopped permanently
long before a trial.
She told herself to stop thinking like that. I’ll make it in,
and I’ll make it out. The Light burn Rand al’Thor for
getting me into this!
Three or four Accepted, women Min’s age or perhaps a little
older, were circulating through the round room, speaking softly
to the petitioners. Their white dresses had no decoration except
for seven bands of color at the hem, one band for each Ajah.
Now and again a novice, a still younger woman or girl all in
white, came to lead someone deeper into the Tower. The
petitioners always followed the novices with an odd mix of
excited eagerness and foot-dragging reluctance.
Min’s grip tightened on her bundle as one of the Accepted
stopped in front of her. “The Light illumine you,” the
curly-haired woman said perfunctorily. “I am called Faolain.
How may the Tower help you?”
Faolain’s dark, round face held the patience of someone doing
a tedious job when she would rather be doing something else.
Studying, probably, from what Min knew of the Accepted.
Learning to be Aes Sedai. Most important, however, was the
lack of recognition in the Accepted’s eyes; the two of them had
met when Min was in the Tower before, though only briefly.
Just the same, Min lowered her face in assumed diffidence. It
was not unnatural; a good many country folk did not really
understand the great step up from Accepted to full Aes Sedai.
Shielding her features behind the edge of her cloak, she looked
away from Faolain.
“I have a question I must ask the Amyrlin Seat,” she began,
then cut off abruptly as three Aes Sedai stopped to look into the entry hall, two from one archway and one from another.
Accepted and novices curtsied when their rounds took them
close to one of the Aes Sedai, but otherwise went on about
their tasks, perhaps a trifle more briskly. That was all. Not so
for the petitioners. They seemed to catch their breaths all
together. Away from the White Tower, away from Tar Valon,
they might simply have thought the Aes Sedai three women
whose ages they could not guess, three women in the flush of
their prime, yet with more maturity than their smooth cheeks
suggested. In the Tower, though, there was no question. A
woman who had worked very long with the One Power was
not touched by time in the same way as other women. In the
Tower, no one needed to see a golden Great Serpent ring to
know an Aes Sedai.
A ripple of curtsies spread through the huddle, and jerky
bows from the few men. Two or three people even fell to their
knees. The rich merchant looked frightened; the farm couple at
her side stared at legends come to life. How to deal with Aes
Sedai was a matter of hearsay for most; it was unlikely that
any here, except those who actually lived in Tar Valon, had
seen an Aes Sedai before, and probably not even the Tar
Valoners had been this close.
But it was not the Aes Sedai themselves that halted Min’s
tongue. Sometimes, not often, she saw things when she looked
at people, images and auras that usually flared and were gone
in moments. Occasionally she knew what they meant. It
happened rarely, the knowing—much more rarely than the
seeing, even—but when she knew, she was always right.
Unlike most others, Aes Sedai—and their Warders—always had
images and auras, sometimes so many dancing and shifting
that they made Min dizzy. The numbers made no difference in
interpreting them, though; she knew what they meant for Aes
Sedai as seldom as for anyone else. But this time she knew
more than she wanted to, and it made her shiver.
A slender woman with black hair falling to her waist, the only
one of the three she recognized—her name was Ananda; she
was Yellow Ajah—wore a sickly brown halo, shriveled and split
by rotting fissures that fell in and widened as they decayed.
The small, fair-haired Aes Sedai beside Ananda was Green
Ajah, by her green-fringed shawl. The White Flame of Tar
Valon on it showed for a moment when she turned her back.
And on her shoulder, as if nestled among the grape vines and
flowering apple branches worked on her shawl, sat a human
skull. A small woman’s skull, picked clean and sun-bleached.
The third, a plumply pretty woman halfway around the room,
wore no shawl; most Aes Sedai did not except for ceremony.
The lift of her chin and the set of her shoulders spoke of
strength and pride. She seemed to be casting cool blue eyes
on the petitioners through a tattered curtain of blood, crimson
streamers running down her face.
Blood and skull and halo faded away in the dance of images
around the three, came and faded again. The petitioners stared
in awe, seeing only three women who could touch the True
Source and channel the One Power. No one but Min saw the
rest. No one but Min knew those three women were going to
die. All on the same day.
“The Amyrlin cannot see everyone,” Faolain said with poorly
hidden impatience. “Her next public audience is not for ten
days. Tell me what you want, and I will arrange for you to
see the sister who can best help you.”
Min’s eye flew to the bundle in her arms and stayed there,
partly so she would not have to see again what she had
already seen. All three of them! Light! What chance was there
that three Aes Sedai would die on the same day? But she
knew. She knew.
“I have the right to speak to the Amyrlin Seat. In person.” It
was a right seldom demanded—who would dare?—but it existed.
“Any woman has that right, and I ask it.”
“Do you think the Amyrlin Seat herself can see everyone who
comes to the White Tower? Surely another Aes Sedai can help
you.” Faolain gave heavy weight to the titles as if to overpower
Min. “Now tell me what your question is about. And give me
your name, so the novice will know who to come for.”
“My name is . . . Elmindreda.” Min winced in spite of herself.
She had always hated the name, but the Amyrlin was one of
the few people living who had ever heard it. If only she
remembered. “I have the right to speak to the Amyrlin. And
my question is for her alone. I have the right.”
The Accepted arched an eyebrow. “Elmindreda?” Her mouth
twitched toward an amused smile. “And you claim your rights.
Very well. I will send word to the Keeper of the Chronicles
that you wish to see the Amyrlin Seat personally, Elmindreda.”
Min wanted to slap the woman for the way she emphasized
“Elmindreda,” but instead she forced out a murmured “Thank
you.”
“Do not thank me yet. No doubt it will be hours before the
Keeper finds time to reply, and it will certainly be that you can
ask your question at the Mother’s next public audience. Wait
with patience. Elmindreda.” She gave Min a tight smile, almost
a smirk, as she turned away.
Grinding her teeth, Min took her bundle to stand against the
wall between two of the archways, where she tried to blend
into the pale stonework. Trust no one, and avoid notice until
you reach the Amyrlin
, Moiraine had told her. Moiraine was
one Aes Sedai she did trust. Most of the time. It was good
advice in any case. All she had to do was reach the Amyrlin,
and it would be over. She could don her own clothes again,
see her friends, and leave. No more need for hiding.
She was relieved to see that the Aes Sedai had gone. Three
Aes Sedai dying on one day. It was impossible; that was the
only word. Yet it was going to happen. Nothing she said or
did could change it—when she knew what an image meant, it
happened—but she had to tell the Amyrlin about this. It might
even be as important as the news she brought from Moiraine,
though that was hard to believe.
Another Accepted came to replace one already there, and to
Min’s eyes bars floated in front of her apple-cheeked face, like
a cage. Sheriam, the Mistress of Novices, looked into the
hall—after one glance, Min kept her gaze on the stone under
her feet; Sheriam knew her all too well—and the red-haired
Aes Sedai’s face seemed battered and bruised. It was only the
viewing, of course, but Min still had to bite her lip to stifle a
gasp. Sheriam, with her calm authority and sureness, was as
indestructible as the Tower. Surely nothing could harm Sheriam.
But something was going to.
An Aes Sedai unknown to Min, wearing the shawl of the
Brown Ajah, accompanied a stout woman in finely woven red
wool to the doors. The stout woman walked as lightly as a girl,
face shining, almost laughing with pleasure. The Brown sister
was smiling, too, but her aura faded like a guttering candle
flame.
Death. Wounds, captivity, and death. To Min it might as well
have been printed on a page.
She set her eyes on her feet. She did not want to see any
more. Let her remember, she thought. She had not felt
desperation at any time on her long ride from the Mountains
of Mist, not even on the two occasions when someone tried to
steal her horse, but she felt it now. Light, let her remember
that bloody name
.
“Mistress Elmindreda?”
Min gave a start. The black-haired novice who stood before
her was barely old enough to be away from home, perhaps
fifteen or sixteen, though she made a great effort at dignity.
“Yes? I am . . . . That is my name.”
“I am Sahra. If you will come with me”—Sahra’s piping voice
took on a note of wonder—“the Amyrlin Seat will see you in
her study now.”
Min gave a sigh of relief and followed eagerly.
Her cloak’s deep hood still hid her face, but it did not stop
her seeing, and the more she saw, the more she grew eager
to reach the Amyrlin. Few people walked the broad corridors
that spiraled upward with their brightly colored floor tiles, and
their wall hangings and golden lampstands—the Tower had
been built to hold far greater numbers than it did now—but
nearly everyone she saw as she climbed higher wore an image
or aura that spoke to her of violence and danger.
Warders hurried by with barely a glance for the two women,
men who moved like hunting wolves, their swords only an
afterthought to their deadliness, but they seemed to have
bloody faces, or gaping wounds. Swords and spears danced
about their heads, threatening. Their auras flashed wildly,
flickered on the knife edge of death. She saw dead men
walking, knew they would die on the same day as the Aes
Sedai in the entry hall, or at most a day later. Even some of
the servants, men and women with the Flame of Tar Valon on
their breasts, hurrying about their work, bore signs of violence.
An Aes Sedai glimpsed down a side hallway appeared to have
chains in the air around her, and another, crossing the
corridor ahead of Min and her guide, seemed for most of
those few strides to wear a silver collar around her neck. Min’s
breath caught at that; she wanted to scream.
“It can all be overwhelming to someone who’s never seen it
before,” Sahra said, trying and failing to sound as if the Tower
were as ordinary to her now as her home village. “But you
are safe here. The Amyrlin Seat will make things right.” Her
voice squeaked when she mentioned the Amyrlin.
“Light, let her do just that,” Min muttered. The novice gave
her a smile that was meant to be soothing.
By the time they reached the hall outside the Amyrlin’s study,
Min’s stomach was churning and she was treading almost on
Sahra’s heels. Only the need to pretend that she was a
stranger had kept her from running ahead long since.
One of the doors to the Amyrlin’s chambers opened, and a
young man with red-gold hair came stalking out, nearly striding
into Min and her escort. Tall and straight and strong in his
blue coat thickly embroidered with gold on sleeves and collar,
Gawyn of House Trakand, son of Queen Morgase of Andor,
looked every inch the proud young lord. A furious young lord.
There was no time to drop her head; he was staring down
into her hood, right into her face.
His eyes widened in surprise, then narrowed to slits of blue
ice. “So you are back. Do you know where my sister and
Egwene have gone?”
“They are not here?” Min forgot everything in a rising flood
of panic. Before she knew what she was doing she had seized
his sleeves, peering up at him urgently, and forced him back a
step. “Gawyn, they started for the Tower months ago! Elayne
and Egwene, and Nynaeve, too. With Verin Sedai and . . . .
Gawyn, I . . . I . . . .”
“Calm yourself,” he said, gently undoing her grip on his coat.
“Light! I didn’t mean to frighten you so. They arrived safely.
And would not say a word of where they had been, or why.
Not to me. I suppose there’s scant hope you will?” She
thought she kept her face straight, but he took one look and
said, “I thought not. This place has more secrets than . . . .
They’ve vanished again. And Nynaeve, too.” Nynaeve was
almost an offhand addition; she might be one of Min’s friends,
but she meant nothing to him. His voice began to roughen
once more, growing tighter by the second. “Again without a
word. Not a word! Supposedly they’re on a farm somewhere
as penance for running away, but I cannot find out where.
The Amyrlin won’t give me a straight answer.”
Min flinched; for a moment, streaks of dried blood had made
his face a grim mask. It was like a double hammer blow. Her
friends were gone—it had eased her coming to the Tower,
knowing they were here—and Gawyn was going to be
wounded on the day the Aes Sedai died.
Despite all she had seen since entering the Tower, despite
her fear, none of it had really touched her personally until
now. Disaster striking the Tower would spread far from Tar
Valon, yet she was not of the Tower and never could be. But
Gawyn was someone she knew, someone she liked, and he
was going to be hurt more than the blood told, hurt somehow
deeper than wounds to his flesh. It hit her that if catastrophe
seized the Tower, not only distant Aes Sedai would be harmed,
women she could never feel close to, but her friends as well.
They were of the Tower.
In a way she was glad Egwene and the others were not
there, glad she could not look at them and perhaps see signs
of death. Yet she wanted to look, to be sure, to look at her
friends and see nothing, or see that they would live. Where in
the Light were they? Why had they gone? Knowing those
three, she thought it possible that if Gawyn did not know
where they were, it was because they did not want him to
know. It could be that.
Suddenly she remembered where she was and why, and that
she was not alone with Gawyn. Sahra seemed to have
forgotten she was taking Min to the Amyrlin; she seemed to
have forgotten everything but the young lord, making calf-eyes
that he was not noticing. Even so, there was no use
pretending any longer to be a stranger to the Tower. She was
at the Amyrlin’s door; nothing could stop her now.
“Gawyn, I don’t know where they are, but if they are doing
penance on a farm, they’re probably all sweat, and mud to
their hips, and you are the last one they will want to see
them.” She was not much easier about their absence than
Gawyn was, in truth. Too much had happened, too much was
happening, too much with ties to them, and to her. But it was
not impossible they had been sent off for punishment. “You
won’t help them by making the Amyrlin angry.”
“I don’t know that they are on a farm. Or even alive. Why
all this hiding and sidestepping if they’re just pulling weeds? If
anything happens to my sister . . . . Or to Egwene . . . .” He
frowned at the toes of his boots. “I am supposed to look after
Elayne. How can I protect her when I don’t know where she
is?”
Min sighed. “Do you think she needs looking after? Either of
them?” But if the Amyrlin had sent them somewhere, maybe
they did. The Amyrlin was capable of sending a woman into a
bear’s den with nothing but a switch if it suited her purposes.
And she would expect the woman to come back with a
bearskin, or the bear on a leash, as instructed. But telling
Gawyn that would only inflame his temper and his worries.
“Gawyn, they have pledged to the Tower. They won’t thank
you for meddling.”
“I know Elayne isn’t a child,” he said patiently, “even if she
does bounce back and forth between running off like one and
playing at being Aes Sedai. But she is my sister, and beyond
that, she is Daughter-Heir of Andor. She’ll be queen, after
Mother. Andor needs her whole and safe to take the throne,
not another Succession.”
Playing at being Aes Sedai? Apparently he did not realize the
extent of his sister’s talent. The Daughter-Heirs of Andor had
been sent to the Tower to train for as long as there had been
an Andor, but Elayne was the first to have enough talent to
be raised to Aes Sedai, and a powerful Aes Sedai at that. Very
likely he also did not know Egwene was just as strong.
“So you will protect her whether she wants it or not?” She
said it in a flat voice meant to let him know he was making a
mistake, but he missed the warning and nodded agreement.
“That has been my duty since the day she was born. My
blood shed before hers; my life given before hers. I took that
oath when I could barely see over the side of her cradle;
Gareth Bryne had to explain to me what it meant. I won’t
break it now. Andor needs her more than it needs me.”
He spoke with a calm certainty, an acceptance of something
natural and right, that sent chills through her. She had always
thought of him as boyish, laughing and teasing, but now he
was something alien. She thought the Creator must have been
tired when it came time to make men; sometimes they hardly
seemed human. “And Egwene? What oath did you take about
her?”
His face did not change, but he shifted his feet warily. “I’m
concerned about Egwene, of course. And Nynaeve. What
happens to Elayne’s companions might happen to Elayne. I
assume they’re still together; when they were here, I seldom
saw one without the others.”
“My mother always told me to marry a poor liar, and you
qualify. Except that I think someone else has first claim.”
“Some things are meant to be,” he said quietly, “and some
never can. Galad is heartsick because Egwene is gone.” Galad
was his half-brother, the pair of them sent to Tar Valon to
train under the Warders. That was another Andoran tradition.
Galadedrid Damodred was a man who took doing the right
thing to the point of a fault, as Min saw it, but Gawyn could
see no wrong in him. And he would not speak his feelings for
a woman Galad had set his heart on.
She wanted to shake him, shake some sense into him, but
there was no time now. Not with the Amyrlin waiting, not with
what she had to tell the Amyrlin waiting. Certainly not with
Sahra standing there, calf-eyes or no calf-eyes. “Gawyn, I am
summoned to the Amyrlin. Where can I find you, when she is
done with me?”
“I will be in the practice yard. The only time I can stop
worrying is when I am working the sword with Hammar.”
Hammar was a blademaster, and the Warder who taught the
sword. “Most days I’m there until the sun sets.”
“Good, then. I will come as soon as I can. And try to watch
what you say. If you make the Amyrlin angry with you, Elayne
and Egwene might share in it.”
“That I cannot promise,” he said firmly. “Something is wrong
in the world. Civil war in Cairhien. The same and worse in
Tarabon and Arad Doman. False Dragons. Troubles and
rumors of troubles everywhere. I don’t say the Tower is behind
it, but even here things are not what they should be. Or what
they seem. Elayne and Egwene vanishing isn’t the whole of it.
Still, they are the part that concerns me. I will find out where
they are. And if they have been hurt . . . . If they are dead .
. . .”
He scowled, and for an instant his face was that bloody
mask again. More: a sword floated above his head, and a
banner waved behind it. The long-hilted sword, like those most
Warders used, had a heron engraved on its slightly curved
blade, symbol of a blademaster, and Min could not say whether
it belonged to Gawyn or threatened him. The banner bore
Gawyn’s sigil of the charging White Boar, but on a field of
green rather than the red of Andor. Both sword and banner
faded with the blood.
“Be careful, Gawyn.” She meant it two ways. Careful of what
he said, and careful in a way she could not explain, even to
herself. “You must be very careful.”
His eyes searched her face as if he had heard some of her
deeper meaning. “I . . . will try,” he said finally. He put on a
grin, almost the grin she remembered, but the effort was plain.
“I suppose I had better get myself back to the practice yard if
I expect to keep up with Galad. I managed two out of five
against Hammar this morning, but Galad actually won three,
the last time he bothered to come to the yard.” Suddenly he
appeared to really see her for the first time, and his grin
became genuine. “You ought to wear dresses more often. It’s
pretty on you. Remember, I will be there till sunset.”
As he strode away with something very close to the
dangerous grace of a Warder, Min realized she was smoothing
the dress over her hip and stopped immediately. The Light
burn all men!
Sahra exhaled as if she had been holding her breath. “He is
very good-looking, isn’t he?” she said dreamily. “Not as
good-looking as Lord Galad, of course. And you really know
him.” It was half a question, but only half.
Min echoed the novice’s sigh. The girl would talk with her
friends in the novices’ quarters. The son of a queen was a
natural topic, especially when he was handsome and had an
air about him like the hero in a gleeman’s tale. A strange
woman only made for more interesting speculation. Still, there
was nothing to be done about it. At any rate, it could hardly
cause any harm now.
“The Amyrlin Seat must be wondering why we haven’t come,”
she said.
Sahra came to herself with a wide-eyed start and a loud
gulp. Seizing Min’s sleeve with one hand, she jumped to open
one of the doors, pulling Min behind her. The moment they
were inside, the novice curtsied hastily and burst out in panic,
“I’ve brought her, Leane Sedai. Mistress Elmindreda? The
Amyrlin Seat wants to see her?”
The tall, coppery-skinned woman in the anteroom wore the
hand-wide stole of the Keeper of the Chronicles, blue to show
she had been raised from the Blue Ajah. Fists on hips, she
waited for the girl to finish, then dismissed her with a clipped
“Took you long enough, child. Back to your chores, now.”
Sahra bobbed another curtsy and scurried out as quickly as
she had entered.
Min stood with her eyes on the floor, her hood still pulled up
around her face. Blundering in front of Sahra had been bad
enough—though at least the novice did not know her
name—but Leane knew her better than anyone in the Tower
except the Amyrlin. Min was sure it could make no difference
now, but after what had happened in the hallway, she meant
to hold to Moiraine’s instructions until she was alone with the
Amyrlin.
This time her precautions did no good. Leane took two steps,
pushed back the hood, and grunted as if she had been poked
in the stomach. Min raised her head and stared back defiantly,
trying to pretend she had not been attempting to sneak past.
Straight, dark hair only a little longer than her own framed the
Keeper’s face; the Aes Sedai’s expression was a blend of
surprise and displeasure at being surprised.
“So you are Elmindreda, are you?” Leane said briskly. She
was always brisk. “I must say you look it more in that dress
than in your usual . . . garb.”
“Just Min, Leane Sedai, if you please.” Min managed to keep
her face straight, but it was difficult not to glare. The Keeper’s
voice had held too much amusement. If her mother had had
to name her after someone in a story, why did it have to be
a woman who seemed to spend most of her time sighing at
men, when she was not inspiring them to compose songs
about her eyes, or her smile?
“Very well. Min. I’ll not ask where you’ve been, nor why
you’ve come back in a dress, apparently wanting to ask a
question of the Amyrlin. Not now, at least.” Her face said she
meant to ask later, though, and get answers. “I suppose the
Mother knows who Elmindreda is? Of course. I should have
known that when she said to send you straight in, and alone.
The Light alone knows why she puts up with you.” She broke
off with a concerned frown. “What is the matter, girl? Are you
ill?”
Min carefully blanked her face. “No. No, I am all right.” For
a moment the Keeper had been looking through a transparent
mask of her own face, a screaming mask. “May I go in now,
Leane Sedai?”
Leane studied her a moment longer, then jerked her head
toward the inner chamber. “In with you.” Min’s leap to obey
would have satisfied the hardest taskmistress.
The Amyrlin Seat’s study had been occupied by many grand
and powerful women over the centuries, and reminders of the
fact filled the room, from the tall fireplace all of golden marble
from Kandor, cold now, to the paneled walls of pale, oddly
striped wood, iron hard yet carved in wondrous beasts and
wildly feathered birds. Those panels had been brought from the
mysterious lands beyond the Aiel Waste well over a thousand
years ago, and the fireplace was more than twice as old. The
polished redstone of the floor had come from the Mountains of
Mist. High arched windows let onto a balcony. The iridescent
stone framing the windows shone like pearls, and had been
salvaged from the remains of a city sunk into the Sea of
Storms by the Breaking of the World; no one had ever seen
its like.
The current occupant, Siuan Sanche, had been born a
fisherman’s daughter in Tear, though, and the furnishings she
had chosen were simple, if well made and well polished. She
sat in a stout chair behind a large table plain enough to have
served a farmhouse. The only other chair in the room, just as
plain and usually set off to one side, now stood in front of the
table atop a small Tairen rug, simple in blue and brown and
gold. Half a dozen books rested open on tall reading stands
about the floor. That was all of it. A drawing hung above the
fireplace: tiny fishing boats working among reeds in the Fingers
of the Dragon, just as her father’s boat had.
At first glance, despite her smooth Aes Sedai features, Siuan
Sanche herself looked as simple as her furnishings. She herself
was sturdy, and handsome rather than beautiful, and the only
bit of ostentation in her clothing was the broad stole of the
Amyrlin Seat she wore, with one colored stripe for each of the
seven Ajahs. Her age was indeterminate, as with any Aes
Sedai; not even a hint of gray showed in her dark hair. But
her sharp blue eyes brooked no nonsense, and her firm jaw
spoke of the determination of the youngest woman ever to be
chosen Amyrlin Seat. For over ten years Siuan Sanche had
been able to summon rulers, and the powerful, and they had
come, even if they hated the White Tower and feared Aes
Sedai.
As the Amyrlin strode around in front of the table, Min set
down her bundle and began an awkward curtsy, muttering
irritably under her breath at having to do so. Not that she
wanted to be disrespectful—that did not even occur to one
facing a woman like Siuan Sanche—but the bow she usually
would have made seemed foolish in a dress, and she had only
a rough idea of how to curtsy.
Halfway down, with her skirts already spread, she froze like a
crouching toad. Siuan Sanche was standing there as regal as
any queen, and for a moment she was also lying on the floor,
naked. Aside from her being in only her skin, there was
something odd about the image, but it vanished before Min
could say what. It was as strong a viewing as she had ever
seen, and she had no idea what it meant.
“Seeing things again, are you?” the Amyrlin said. “Well, I can
certainly make use of that ability of yours. I could have used it
all the months you were gone. But we’ll not talk of that.
What’s done is done. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills.”
She smiled a tight smile. “But if you do it again, I’ll have your
hide for gloves. Stand up, girl. Leane forces enough ceremony
on me in a month to last any sensible woman a year. I don’t
have time for it. Not these days. Now, what did you just see?”
Min straightened slowly. It was a relief to be back with
someone who knew of her talent, even if it was the Amyrlin
Seat herself. She did not have to hide what she saw from the
Amyrlin. Far from it. “You were . . . . You weren’t wearing
any clothes. I . . . I don’t know what it means, Mother.”
Siuan barked a short, mirthless laugh. “No doubt that I’ll take
a lover. But I have no time for that, either. There’s no time
for winking at the men when you’re busy bailing the boat.”
“Maybe,” Min said slowly. It could have meant that, though
she doubted it. “I just do not know. But, Mother, I’ve been
seeing things ever since I walked into the Tower. Something
bad is going to happen, something terrible.”
She started with the Aes Sedai in the entry hall and told
everything she had seen, as well as what everything meant,
when she was sure. She held back what Gawyn had said,
though, or most of it; it was no use telling him not to anger
the Amyrlin if she did it for him. The rest she laid out as
starkly as she had seen it. Some of her fear came out as she
dredged it all up, seeing it all again; her voice shook before
she was done.
The Amyrlin’s expression never changed. “So you spoke with
young Gawyn,” she said when Min finished. “Well, I think I
can convince him to keep quiet. And if I remember Sahra
correctly, the girl could do with some time working in the
country. She’ll spread no gossip hoeing a vegetable patch.”
“I don’t understand,” Min said. “Why should Gawyn keep
quiet? About what? I told him nothing. And Sahra . . . ?
Mother, perhaps I didn’t make myself clear. Aes Sedai and
Warders are going to die. It has to mean a battle. And unless
you send a lot of Aes Sedai and Warders off somewhere—and
servants, too; I saw servants dead and injured, too—unless you
do that, that battle will be here! In Tar Valon!”
“Did you see that?” the Amyrlin demanded. “A battle? Do
you know, with your . . . your talent, or are you guessing?”
“What else could it be? At least four Aes Sedai are as good
as dead. Mother, I’ve only laid eyes on nine of you since
coming back, and four are going to die! And the Warders . . .
. What else could it be?”
“More things than I like to think of,” Siuan said grimly.
“When? How long before this . . . thing . . . occurs?”
Min shook her head. “I do not know. Most of it will happen
in the space of a day, maybe two, but that could be tomorrow
or a year from now. Or ten.”
“Let us pray for ten. If it comes tomorrow, there isn’t much
I can do to stop it.”
Min grimaced. Only two Aes Sedai besides Siuan Sanche
knew of what she could do: Moiraine, and Verin Mathwin, who
had tried to study her talent. None of them knew how it
worked any more than she did, except that it had nothing to
do with the Power. Perhaps that was why only Moiraine
seemed able to accept the fact that when she knew what a
viewing meant, it happened.
“Maybe it’s the Whitecloaks, Mother. They were everywhere in
Alindaer when I crossed the bridge.” She did not believe the
Children of the Light had anything to do with what was
coming, but she was reluctant to say what she believed.
Believed, not knew; yet that was bad enough.
But the Amyrlin had begun shaking her head before she
finished. “They would try something if they could, I’ve no
doubt—they would love to strike at the Tower—but Eamon
Valda won’t move openly without orders from the Lord Captain
Commander, and Pedron Niall will not strike unless he thinks
we’re injured. He knows our strength too well to be foolish.
For a thousand years the Whitecloaks have been like that.
Silverpike in the reeds, waiting for a hint of Aes Sedai blood in
the water. But we’ve showed them none yet, nor will we, if I
can help it.”
“Yet if Valda did try something on his own—”
Siuan cut her off. “He has no more than five hundred men
close to Tar Valon, girl. He sent the rest away weeks ago, to
cause trouble elsewhere. The Shining Walls held off the Aiel.
And Artur Hawkwing, too. Valda will never break into Tar
Valon unless the city is already falling apart from the inside.”
Her voice did not change as she went on. “You very much
want me to believe the trouble will come from the Whitecloaks.
Why?” There was no gentleness in her eyes.
“Because I want to believe it,” Min muttered. She licked her
lips and spoke the words she did not want to say. “The silver
collar I saw on that one Aes Sedai. Mother, it looked . . . . It
looked like one of the collars the . . . the Seanchan use to . .
. to control women who can channel.” Her voice dwindled as
Siuan’s mouth twisted with distaste.
“Filthy things,” the Amyrlin growled. “As well most people
don’t believe a quarter of what they hear about the Seanchan.
But there’s more chance of it being the Whitecloaks. If the
Seanchan land again, anywhere, I will know it in days by
pigeon, and it is a long way from the sea to Tar Valon. If
they do reappear, I will have plenty of warning. No, I fear
what you see is something far worse than the Seanchan. I fear
it can only be the Black Ajah. Only a handful of us know
about them, and I don’t relish what will happen when the
knowledge becomes common, but they are the greatest
immediate threat to the Tower.”
Min realized she was clutching her skirt so hard that her
hands hurt; her mouth was dry as dust. The White Tower
had always coldly denied the existence of a hidden Ajah,
dedicated to the Dark One. The surest way to anger an Aes
Sedai was merely to mention such a thing. For the Amyrlin
Seat herself to give the Black Ajah reality so casually made
Min’s spine turn to ice.
As if she had said nothing out of the ordinary, the Amyrlin
went on. “But you didn’t come all this way just to do your
viewings. What word from Moiraine? I know everything from
Arad Doman to Tarabon is in chaos, to say the least.” That
was saying the least, indeed; men supporting the Dragon
Reborn were fighting those opposing him, and had turned both
countries to civil war while they still fought each other for
control of Almoth Plain. Siuan’s tone dismissed all that as a
detail. “But I’ve heard nothing of Rand al’Thor for months. He
is the focus of everything. Where is he? What does Moiraine
have him doing? Sit, girl. Sit.” She gestured to the chair in
front of the table.
Min approached the chair on wobbly legs and half fell into it.
The Black Ajah! Oh, Light! Aes Sedai were supposed to stand
for the Light. Even if she did not really trust them, there was
always that. Aes Sedai, and all the power of the Aes Sedai,
stood for the Light and against the Shadow. Only now it was
not true any longer. She hardly heard herself say, “He’s on his
way to Tear.”
“Tear! It’s Callandor, then. Moiraine means him to take the
Sword That Cannot Be Touched out of the Stone of Tear. I
swear I’ll hang her in the sun to dry! I will make her wish
she were a novice again! He cannot be ready for that yet!”
“It was not . . . .” Min stopped to clear her throat. “It was
not Moiraine’s doing. Rand left in the middle of the night, by
himself. The others followed, and Moiraine sent me to tell you.
They could be in Tear by now. For all I know, he could have
Callandor by now.”
“Burn him!” Siuan barked. “By now, he could be dead! I
wish he had never heard a word of the Prophecies of the
Dragon. If I could keep him from hearing another, I would.”
“But doesn’t he have to fulfill the Prophecies? I don’t
understand.”
The Amyrlin leaned back against her table wearily. “As though
anyone even understands most of them! The Prophecies aren’t
what makes him the Dragon Reborn; all that takes is for him
to admit it, and he must have if he is going for Callandor.
The Prophecies are meant to announce to the world who he
is, to prepare him for what is coming, to prepare the world for
it. If Moiraine can keep some control over him, she will guide
him to the Prophecies we can be sure of—when he is ready to
face them!—and for the rest, we trust that what he does is
enough. We hope. For all I know, he has already fulfilled
Prophecies none of us understands. The Light send it’s
enough.”
“So you do mean to control him. He said you’d try to use
him, but this is the first I’ve heard you admit it.” Min felt cold
inside. Angry, she added, “You haven’t done such a good job
of it so far, you and Moiraine.”
Siuan’s tiredness seemed to slide from her shoulders. She
straightened and stood looking down at Min. “You had best
hope we can. Did you think we could just let him run about
loose? Headstrong and stubborn, untrained, unprepared, maybe
going mad already. Do you think we could trust to the Pattern,
to his destiny, to keep him alive, like some story? This isn’t a
story, he isn’t some invincible hero, and if his thread is
snipped out of the Pattern, the Wheel of Time won’t notice his
going, and the Creator will produce no miracles to save us. If
Moiraine cannot reef his sails, he very well may get himself
killed, and where are we then? Where is the world? The Dark
One’s prison is failing. He will touch the world again; it is only
a matter of time. If Rand al’Thor is not there to face him in
the Last Battle, if the headstrong young fool gets himself killed
first, the world is doomed. The War of the Power all over
again, with no Lews Therin and his Hundred Companions.
Then fire and shadow, forever.” She stopped suddenly, peering
at Min’s face. “So that’s the way the wind sets, is it? You and
Rand. I did not expect this.”
Min shook her head vigorously, felt her cheeks coloring. “Of
course not! I was . . . It’s the Last Battle. And the Dark One.
Light, just thinking about the Dark One loose ought to be
enough to freeze a Warder’s marrow. And the Black Ajah—”
“Don’t try to dissemble,” the Amyrlin said sharply. “Do you
think this is the first time I ever saw a woman afraid for her
man’s life? You might as well admit it.”
Min squirmed on her chair. Siuan’s eyes dug at her, knowing
and impatient. “All right,” she muttered finally, “I’ll tell you all
of it, and much good it does either of us. The first time I ever
saw Rand, I saw three women’s faces, and one of them was
mine. I’ve never seen anything about myself before or since,
but I knew what it meant. I was going to fall in love with him.
All three of us were.”
“Three. The other two. Who are they?”
Min gave her a bitter smile. “The faces were blurred; I don’t
know who they are.”
“Nothing to say that he would love you in return?”
“Nothing! He has never looked at me twice. I think he sees
me as . . . as a sister. So don’t think you can use me as
leash on him, because it will not work!”
“Yet you do love him.”
“I don’t have any choice.” Min tried to make her voice less
sullen. “I tried treating it as a joke, but I can’t laugh anymore.
You may not believe me, but when I know what it means, it
happens.”
The Amyrlin tapped a finger against her lips and looked at
Min consideringly.
That look worried Min. She had not meant to make such a
show of herself, nor to tell as much as she had. She had not
told everything, but she knew she should have learned by now
not to give an Aes Sedai a lever, even if she did not see how
it could be used. Aes Sedai were skilled at finding ways.
“Mother, I’ve delivered Moiraine’s message, and I’ve told
everything I know of what my viewings meant. There’s no
reason now I can’t put on my own clothes and go.”
“Go where?”
“Tear.” After talking with Gawyn, trying to make sure he did
not do something foolish. She wished she dared ask where
Egwene and the other two were, but if the Amyrlin would not
tell Elayne’s brother, there was small chance she would tell
Min. And Siuan Sanche still had that weighing look in her eyes.
“Or wherever Rand is. I may be a fool, but I’m not the first
woman to be a fool over a man.”
“The first to be a fool over the Dragon Reborn. It will be
dangerous, being close to Rand al’Thor once the world finds
out who he is, what he is. And if he now wields Callandor,
the world will learn soon enough. Half will want to kill him
anyway, as if by killing him they can stop the Last Battle, stop
the Dark One from breaking free. A good many will die, close
to him. It might be better for you to stay here.”
The Amyrlin sounded sympathetic, but Min did not believe it.
She did not believe Siuan Sanche was capable of sympathy. “I’ll
take the risk; maybe I can help him. With what I see. It isn’t
even as if the Tower would be that much safer, not so long
as there is one Red sister here. They’ll see a man who can
channel and forget the Last Battle, and the Prophecies of the
Dragon.”
“So will many others,” Siuan broke in calmly. “Old ways of
thinking are hard to shed, for Aes Sedai as for anyone else.”
Min gave her a puzzled look. She seemed to be taking Min’s
side of the thing now. “It is no secret I am friends with
Egwene and Nynaeve, and no secret they’re from the same
village as Rand. For the Red Ajah, that will be connection
enough. When the Tower finds out what he is, I would
probably be arrested before the day is out. So will Egwene and
Nynaeve, if you don’t have them hidden away somewhere.”
“Then you mustn’t be recognized. You catch no fish if they
see the net. I suggest you forget your coat and breeches for a
time.” The Amyrlin smiled like a cat smiling at a mouse.
“What fish do you expect to catch with me?” Min asked in a
faint voice. She thought she knew, and hoped desperately she
was wrong.
Her hope did not stop the Amyrlin from saying, “The Black
Ajah. Thirteen of them fled, but I fear some remain. I cannot
be sure who I can trust; for a while I was afraid to trust
anyone. You are no Darkfriend, I know, and your particular
talent may just be some help. At the very least, you’ll be
another trustworthy pair of eyes.”
“You’ve been planning this since I walked in, haven’t you?
That’s why you want to keep Gawyn and Sahra quiet.” Anger
built up inside Min like steam in a kettle. The woman said frog
and expected people to jump. That they usually did just made
it worse. She was no frog, no dancing puppet. “Is this what
you did to Egwene and Elayne and Nynaeve? Send them off
after the Black Ajah? I wouldn’t put it past you!”
“You tend your own nets, child, and let those girls tend
theirs. As far as you are concerned, they are working penance
on a farm. Do I make myself plain?”
That unwavering stare made Min shift on her chair. It was
easy to defy the Amyrlin—until she started staring at you with
those sharp, cold blue eyes. “Yes, Mother.” The meekness of
her reply rankled, but a glance at the Amyrlin convinced her
to let it lie. She plucked at the fine wool of her dress. “I
suppose it won’t kill me to wear this a little longer.” Suddenly
Siuan looked amused; Min felt her hackles rising.
“I fear that won’t be enough. Min in a dress is still Min in a
dress to anyone who looks close. You cannot always wear a
cloak with the hood up. No, you must change everything that
can be changed. For one thing, you will continue to go by
Elmindreda. It is your name, after all.” Min winced. “Your hair
is almost as long as Leane’s, long enough to put in curls. For
the rest . . . . I never had any use for rouge and powder
and paints, but Leane remembers the use of them.”
Min’s eyes had grown wider by the word since the mention
of curls. “Oh, no,” she gasped.
“No one will take you for Min who wears breeches once
Leane makes you into a perfect Elmindreda.”
“Oh, NO!”
“As to why you are staying in the Tower—a reason suitable
for a fluttery young woman who looks and acts nothing at all
like Min.” The Amyrlin frowned thoughtfully, ignoring Min’s
efforts to break in. “Yes. I will let it be put about that Mistress
Elmindreda managed to encourage two suitors to the point that
she has to take shelter from them in the tower until she can
decide between them. A few women still claim sanctuary each
year, and sometimes for reasons as silly.” Her face hardened,
and her eyes sharpened. “If you’re still thinking of Tear, think
again. Consider whether you can be of more help to Rand
there, or here. If the Black Ajah brings the Tower down, or
worse, gains control, he loses even the little help I can give.
So. Are you a woman, or a lovesick girl?”
Trapped. Min could see it as plainly as a shackle, on her leg.
“Do you always get your way with people, Mother?”
The Amyrlin’s smile was even colder this time. “Usually, child.
Usually.”
 
 
Shifting her red-fringed shawl, Elaida stared thoughtfully at the
door to the Amyrlin’s study, through which the two young
women had just vanished. The novice came back out almost
immediately, took one look at Elaida’s face, and bleated like a
frightened sheep. Elaida thought she recognized her, though she
could not bring the girl’s name to mind. She had more
important uses for her time than teaching wretched children.
“Your name?”
“Sahra, Elaida Sedai.” The girl’s reply was a breathless
squeak. Elaida might have no interest in novices, but the
novices knew her, and her reputation.
She remembered the girl now. A daydreamer with moderate
ability who would never be of any real power. It was doubtful
she knew anything more than Elaida had already seen and
heard—or remembered much more than Gawyn’s smile, for
that matter. A fool. Elaida flicked a dismissive hand.
The girl dropped a curtsy so deep her face almost touched
the floor tiles, then fled at a dead run.
Elaida did not see her go. The Red sister had turned away,
already forgetting the novice. As she swept down the corridor,
not a line marred her smooth features, but her thoughts boiled
furiously. She did not even notice the servants, the novices and
Accepted, who scrambled out of her way, curtsying as she
passed. Once she almost walked over a Brown sister with her
nose in a sheaf of notes. The plump Brown jumped back with
a startled squawk that Elaida did not hear.
Dress or no dress, she knew the young woman who had
gone in to see the Amyrlin. Min, who had spent so much time
with the Amyrlin on her first visit to the Tower, though for no
reason anyone knew. Min, who was such close friends with
Elayne, Egwene, and Nynaeve. The Amyrlin was hiding the
whereabouts of those three. Elaida was sure of it. All reports
that they were serving penance on a farm had come at third
or fourth hand from Siuan Sanche, more than enough distance
to hide any twisting of words to avoid an outright lie. Not to
mention the fact that all Elaida’s considerable efforts to find this
farm had yielded nothing.
“The Light burn her!” For a moment open anger painted her
face. She was not sure whether she meant Siuan Sanche or
the Daughter-Heir. Either would serve. A slender Accepted
heard her, glanced at her face, and went as white as her own
dress; Elaida strode by without seeing her.
Apart from everything else, it infuriated her that she could
not find Elayne. Elaida had the Foretelling sometimes, the ability
to foresee future events. If it came seldom and faintly, that was
still more than any Aes Sedai had had since Gitara Moroso,
dead now twenty years. The very first thing Elaida had ever
Foretold, while still an Accepted—and had known enough even
then to keep to herself—was that the Royal line of Andor
would be the key to defeating the Dark One in the Last Battle.
She had attached herself to Morgase as soon as it was clear
Morgase would succeed to the throne, had built her influence
year by patient year. And now all her effort, all her
sacrifice—she might have been Amyrlin herself had she not
concentrated all her energies on Andor—might be for naught
because Elayne had disappeared.
With an effort she forced her thoughts back to what was
important now. Egwene and Nynaeve came from the same
village as that strange young man, Rand al’Thor. And Min
knew him as well, however much she had tried to hide the
fact. Rand al’Thor lay at the heart of it.
Elaida had only seen him once, supposedly a shepherd from
the Two Rivers, in Andor, but looking every inch the Aielman.
The Foretelling had come to her at the sight of him. He was
ta’veren, one of those rare individuals who, instead of being
woven into the Pattern as the Wheel of Time chose, forced the
Pattern to shape itself around them, for a time at least. And
Elaida had seen chaos swirling around him, division and strife
for Andor, perhaps for even more of the world. But Andor
must be kept whole, whatever else happened; that first
Foretelling had convinced her of that.
There were more threads, enough to snare Siuan in her own
web. If the rumors were to be believed, there were three
ta’veren, not just one. All three from the same village, this
Emond’s Field, and all three near the same age, odd enough
to occasion a good deal of talk in the Tower. And on Siuan’s
journey to Shienar, near a year ago now, she had seen them,
even talked with them. Rand al’Thor. Perrin Aybara. Matrim
Cauthon. It was said to be mere happenstance. Just fortuitous
chance. So it was said. Those who said it did not know what
Elaida knew.
When Elaida saw the young al’Thor man, it had been
Moiraine who spirited him away. Moiraine who had
accompanied him, and the other two ta’veren
, in Shienar.
Moiraine Damodred, who had been Siuan Sanche’s closest
friend when they were novices together. Had Elaida been one
to make wagers, she would have wagered that no one else in
the Tower remembered that friendship. On the day they were
raised Aes Sedai, at the end of the Aiel War, Siuan and
Moiraine had walked away from one another and afterward
behaved almost like strangers. But Elaida had been one of the
Accepted over those two novices, had taught their lessons and
chastised them for slacking at chores, and she remembered.
She could hardly believe that their plot could stretch back so
far—al’Thor could not have been born much before that—yet it
was the last link to tie them all together. For her, it was
enough.
Whatever Siuan was up to, she had to be stopped. Turmoil
and chaos multiplied on every side. The Dark One was sure to
break free—the very thought made Elaida shiver and wrap her
shawl around her more tightly—and the Tower had to be aloof
from mundane struggles to face that. The Tower had to be
free to pull the strings to make the nations stand together, free
of the troubles Rand al’Thor would bring. Somehow, he had to
be stopped from destroying Andor.
She had told no one what she knew of al’Thor. She meant
to deal with him quietly, if possible. The Hall of the Tower
already spoke of watching, even guiding, these ta’veren; they
would never agree to dispose of them, of the one in particular,
as he must be disposed of. For the good of the Tower. For
the good of the world.
She made a sound in her throat, close to a growl. Siuan had
always been headstrong, even as a novice, had always thought
much of herself for a poor fisherman’s daughter, but how
could she be fool enough to mix the Tower in this without
telling the Hall? She knew what was coming as well as anyone.
The only way it could be worse was if . . . .
Abruptly Elaida stopped, staring at nothing. Could it be that
this al’Thor could channel? Or one of the others? Most likely it
would be al’Thor. No. Surely not. Not even Siuan would touch
one of those. She could not. “Who knows what that woman
could do?” she muttered. “She was never fit to be the Amyrlin
Seat.”
“Talking to yourself, Elaida? I know you Reds never have
friends outside your own Ajah, but surely you have friends to
talk to inside it.”
Elaida turned her head to regard Alviarin. The swan-necked
Aes Sedai stared back with the insufferable coolness that was a
hallmark of the White Ajah. There was no love lost between
Red and White; they had stood on opposite sides in the Hall
of the Tower for a thousand years. White stood with Blue, and
Siuan had been a Blue. But Whites prided themselves on
dispassionate logic.
“Walk with me,” Elaida said. Alviarin hesitated before falling in
beside her.
At first the White sister arched a disparaging eyebrow at
what Elaida had to say concerning Siuan, but before the end
she was frowning in concentration. “You have no proof of
anything . . . improper,” she said when Elaida finally fell silent.
“Not yet,” Elaida said firmly. She permitted herself a tight
smile when Alviarin nodded. It was a beginning. One way or
another, Siuan would be stopped before she could destroy the
Tower.
 
 
Well hidden in a stand of tall leatherleaf above the north bank
of the River Taren, Dain Bornhald tossed back his white cloak,
with its flaring golden sun on the breast, and raised the stiff
leather tube of a looking glass to his eye. A cloud of tiny
bitemes buzzed around his face, but he ignored them. In the
village of Taren Ferry, across the river, tall stone houses stood
on high foundations against the floods that came every spring.
Villagers hung out of windows or waited on stoops to stare at
the thirty white-cloaked riders sitting their horses in burnished
plate-and-mail. A delegation of village men and women were
meeting with the horsemen. Rather, they were listening to Jaret
Byar, from what Bornhald could see, which was much the best.
Bornhald could almost hear his father’s voice. Let them think
there is a chance, and some fool will try to take it. Then
there’s killing to do, and another fool will try to avenge the
first, so there’s more killing. Put the fear of the Light into
them from the first, let them know no one will be harmed
if they do as they’re told, and you’ll have no trouble
.
His jaw tightened at the thought of his father, dead now. He
was going to do something about that, and soon. He was sure
only Byar knew why he had leaped to accept this command,
aimed at an all-but-forgotten district in the hinterlands of
Andor, and Byar would hold his tongue. Byar had been as
dedicated to Dain’s father as a hound, and he had transferred
all that loyalty to Dain. Bornhald had had no hesitation in
naming Byar second under him when Eamon Valda gave him
the command.
Byar turned his horse and rode back onto the ferry.
Immediately the ferrymen cast off and began hauling the barge
across by means of a heavy rope slung over the swiftly flowing
water. Byar glanced at the men at the rope; they eyed him
nervously as they tramped the length of the barge, then trotted
back to take up the cable again. It all looked good.
“Lord Bornhald?”
Bornhald lowered the looking glass and turned his head. The
hardfaced man who had appeared at his shoulder stood rigid,
staring straight ahead from under a conical helmet. Even after
the hard journey from Tar Valon—and Bornhald had pressed
every mile—his armor shone as brightly as his snowy cloak
with its golden sunburst.
“Yes, Child Ivon?”
“Hundredman Farran sent me, my Lord. It’s the Tinkers.
Ordeith was talking to three of them, my Lord, and now none
of the three can be found.”
“Blood and ashes!” Bornhald spun on his bootheel and strode
back into the trees, Ivon at his heels.
Out of sight of the river, white-cloaked horsemen clogged the
spaces between leatherleafs and pines, lances held with casual
familiarity or bows laid across their pommels. The horses
stamped their hooves impatiently and flicked their tails. The
riders waited more stolidly; this would not be their first river
crossing into strange territory, and this time no one would be
trying to stop them.
In a large clearing beyond the mounted men stood a caravan
of the Tuatha’an, the Traveling People. Tinkers. Nearly a
hundred horse-drawn wagons, like small, boxy houses on
wheels, made an eye-jarring blend of colors, red and green
and yellow and every hue imaginable in combinations only a
Tinker’s eye could like. The people themselves wore clothes that
made their wagons look dull. They sat on the ground in a
large cluster, eyeing the mounted men with an oddly calm
unease; the thin crying of a child was swiftly comforted by its
mother. Nearby, dead mastiffs made a mound already buzzing
with flies. Tinkers would not raise a hand even to defend
themselves, and the dogs had been mostly show, but Bornhald
had not been willing to take a chance.
Six men were all he had thought necessary to watch Tinkers.
Even with stiff faces, they looked embarrassed. None glanced at
the seventh man sitting a horse near the wagons, a bony little
man with a big nose, in a dark gray coat that looked too big
for him despite the fineness of its cut. Farran, a bearded
boulder of a man yet light on his feet for all his height and
width, stood glaring at all seven equally. The hundredman
pressed a gauntleted hand to his heart in salute but left all
talking to Bornhald.
“A word with you, Master Ordeith,” Bornhald said quietly. The
bony man cocked his head, looking at Bornhald for a long
moment before dismounting. Farran growled, but Bornhald kept
his voice low. “Three of the Tinkers cannot be found, Master
Ordeith. Did you perhaps put your own suggestion into
practice?” The first words out of Ordeith’s mouth when he saw
the Tinkers had been “Kill them. They’re of no use.” Bornhald
had killed his share of men, but he had never matched the
casualness with which the little man had spoken.
Ordeith rubbed a finger along the side of his large nose.
“Now, why would I be killing them? And after you ripped me
so for just suggesting it.” His Lugarder accent was heavy
today; it came and went without him seeming to notice,
another thing about the man that disturbed Bornhald.
“Then you allowed them to escape, yes?”
“Well, as to that, I did take a few of them off where I could
see what they knew. Undisturbed, you see.”
“What they knew? What under the Light could Tinkers know
of use to us?”
“There’s no way of telling until you ask, now is there?”
Ordeith said. “I didn’t hurt any of them much, and I told them
to get themselves back to the wagons. Who would be thinking
they’d have the nerve to run away with so many of your men
about?”
Bornhald realized he was grinding his teeth. His orders had
been to make the best time possible to meet this odd fellow,
who would have more orders for him. Bornhald liked none of
it, though both sets of orders bore the seal and signature of
Pedron Niall, Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the
Light.
Too much had been left unsaid, including Ordeith’s exact
status. The little man was there to advise Bornhald, and
Bornhald was to cooperate with Ordeith. Whether Ordeith was
under his command had been left vague, and he did not like
the strong implication that he should heed the fellow’s advice.
Even the reason for sending so many of the Children into this
backwater had been vague. To root out Darkfriends, of course,
and spread the Light; that went without saying. But close to
half a legion on Andoran soil without permission—the order
risked much if word of it reached the Queen in Caemlyn. Too
much to be balanced by the few answers Bornhald had been
given.
It all came back to Ordeith. Bornhald did not understand
how the Lord Captain Commander could trust this man, with
his sly grins and his black moods and his haughty stares so
you could never be sure what kind of man you were talking
to. Not to mention his accent changing in the middle of a
sentence. The fifty Children who had accompanied Ordeith were
as sullen and frowning a lot as Bornhald had ever seen. He
thought Ordeith must have picked them himself to have so
many sour scowls, and it said something of the man that he
would choose that sort. Even his name, Ordeith, meant
“wormwood” in the Old Tongue. Still, Bornhald had his own
reasons for wanting to be where he was. He would cooperate
with the man, since he had to. But only as much as he had
to.
“Master Ordeith,” he said in a carefully level tone, “this ferry
is the only way in or out of the Two Rivers district.” That was
not quite the truth. According to the map he had, there was
no way across the Taren except here, and the upper reaches
of the Manetherendrelle, bordering the region on the south,
had no fords. To the east lay bogs and swamps. Even so,
there must be a way out westward, across the Mountains of
Mist, though his map stopped at the edge of the range. At
best, however, it would be a hard crossing that many of his
men might not survive, and he did not intend to let Ordeith
know of even that small chance. “When it is time to leave, if I
find Andoran soldiers holding this bank, you will ride with the
first to cross. You will find it interesting to see at close hand
the difficulty of forcing a way across a river this wide, yes?”
“This is your first command, is it not?” Ordeith’s voice held a
hint of mockery. “This may be part of Andor on the map, but
Caemlyn has not sent a tax collector this far west in
generations. Even if those three talk, who will believe three
Tinkers? If you think the danger is too great, remember whose
seal is on your orders.”
Farran glanced at Bornhald, half reached for his sword.
Bornhald shook his head slightly, and Farran let his hand fall.
“I mean to cross the river, Master Ordeith. I will cross if the
next word I hear is that Gareth Bryne and the Queen’s
Guards will be here by sundown.”
“Of course,” Ordeith said, suddenly soothing. “There will be as
much glory here as at Tar Valon, I assure you.” His deep,
dark eyes took a glazed look, stared at something in the
distance. “There are things in Tar Valon I want, too.”
Bornhald shook his head. And I must cooperate with him.
Jaret Byar drew up and swung down from his saddle beside
Farran. As tall as the hundredman, Byar was a long-faced man
with dark, deep-set eyes. He looked as if every ounce of fat
had been boiled off of him. “The village is secured, my Lord.
Lucellin is making certain no one slips off. They nearly soiled
themselves when I mentioned Darkfriends. None in their village,
they say. The folk further south are the Darkfriend kind,
though, they say.”
“Further south, is it?” Bornhald said briskly. “We shall see.
Put three hundreds across the river, Byar. Farran’s first. The
rest to follow after the Tinkers cross. And make sure no more
of them get away, yes?”
“We will scour the Two Rivers,” Ordeith broke in. His narrow
face was twisted; saliva bubbled at his lips. “We will flog them,
and flay them, and sear their souls! I promised him! He’ll
come to me, now! He will come!”
Bornhald nodded for Byar and Farran to carry out his
commands. A madman, he thought. The Lord Captain
Commander has tied me to a madman. But at least I will
find my path to Perrin of the Two Rivers. Whatever it
takes, I will avenge my father!
 
 
From a colonnaded terrace on a hilltop, the High Lady Suroth
looked across the wide, lopsided bowl of Cantorin Harbor. The
shaven sides of her scalp left a wide crest of black hair that
fell down her back. Her hands rested lightly on a smooth
stone balustrade as white as her pristine gown with its
hundreds of pleats. There was a faint rhythmic clicking as she
unconsciously drummed her fingers with their inch-long nails,
the first two on each hand lacquered blue.
A slight breeze blew off of the Aryth Ocean, carrying more
than a hint of salt in its coolness. Two young women kneeling
against the wall behind the High Lady held white-plumed fans
ready if the breeze should fail. Two more women and four
young men completed the line of crouching figures waiting to
serve. Barefoot, all eight wore sheer robes, to please the High
Lady’s aesthetic senses with the clean lines of their limbs and
the grace of their motions. At the moment Suroth truly did not
see the servants, no more than one saw furniture.
She saw the six Deathwatch Guards at either end of the
colonnade, though, stiff as statues with their black-tasseled
spears and black-lacquered shields. They symbolized her
triumph, and her danger. The Deathwatch Guard served only
the Empress and her chosen representatives, and they would
kill or die with equal fervor, whichever was necessary. There
was a saying: “On the heights, the paths are paved with
daggers.”
Her fingernails clicked on the stone balustrade. How thin was
the razor’s edge she walked.
Vessels of the Atha’an Miere, the Sea Folk, filled the inner
harbor behind the seawall, even the largest looking too narrow
for their length. Cut rigging made their yards and booms slant
at crazy angles. Their decks were empty, their crews ashore
and under guard, as were any in these islands who had the
skill to sail the open sea. Great, bluff-bowed Seanchan ships by
the score lay in the outer harbor, and anchored off the harbor
mouth. One, its ribbed sails bellied with wind, escorted a swarm
of small fishing boats back toward the island port. If the
smaller craft scattered, some of them might escape, but the
Seanchan ship carried a damane, and one demonstration of a
damane’s power had quelled any such thoughts. The charred,
shattered hulk of the Sea Folk ship still lay on a mudflat near
the harbor mouth.
How long she would manage to keep Sea Folk
elsewhere—and the accursed mainlanders—from learning that
she held these islands, Suroth did not know. It will be long
enough, she told herself. It must be long enough.
She had worked something of a miracle in rallying most of
the Seanchan forces after the debacle the High Lord Turak
had led them to. All but a handful of the vessels that had
escaped from Falme lay under her control, and no one
questioned her right to command the Hailene, the
Forerunners. If her miracle held, no one on the mainland
suspected they were here. Waiting to take back the lands the
Empress had sent them to reclaim, waiting to achieve the
Corenne, the Return. Her agents already scouted the way.
There would be no need to return to the Court of the Nine
Moons and apologize to the Empress for a failure not even
hers.
The thought of having to apologize to the Empress sent a
tremor through her. Such an apology was always humiliating,
and usually painful, but what made her shiver was the chance
of being denied death at the end, of being forced to continue
as if nothing had occurred while everyone, common as well as
the Blood, knew her degradation. A handsome young serving
man sprang to her side, bearing a pale green robe worked in
brilliantly plumaged birds-of-delight. She held her arms out for
the garment and noticed him no more than a clod of dirt
beside her velvet slipper.
To escape that apology, she must retake what had been lost
a thousand years ago. And to do that, she must deal with this
man who, her mainland agents told her, claimed to be the
Dragon Reborn. If I cannot find a way to deal with him,
the displeasure of the Empress will be the least of my
worries.
Turning smoothly, she entered the long room fronting the
terrace, its outer wall all doors and tall windows to catch the
breezes. The pale wood of the walls, smooth and glistening like
satin, pleased Suroth, but she had removed the furnishings of
the old owner, the former Atha’an Miere governor of Cantorin,
and replaced them with a few tall screens, most painted with
birds or flowers. Two were different. One showed a great
spotted cat of the Sen T’jore, as large as a pony, the other a
black mountain eagle, crest erect like a pale crown and
snowy-tipped wings spread to their full seven feet. Such screens
were considered vulgar, but Suroth liked animals. Unable to
bring her menagerie with her across the Aryth Ocean, she had
had the screens made to depict her two favorites. She had
never taken kindly to being balked in anything.
Three women awaited her as she had left them, two kneeling,
one lying prostrate on the bare, polished floor, patterned in
inlays of light and dark wood. The kneeling women wore the
dark blue dresses of sul’dam, red panels embroidered with
forked silver lightning on the breast and on the sides of their
skirts. One of the two, Alwhin, a sharp-faced, blue-eyed woman
with a perpetual glower, had the left side of her head shaved.
The rest of her hair hung to her shoulder in a light brown
braid.
Suroth’s mouth tightened momentarily at the sight of Alwhin.
No sul’dam had ever before been raised to the so’jhin, the
hereditary upper servants of the Blood, much less to a Voice
of the Blood. Yet there had been reasons in Alwhin’s case.
Alwhin knew too much.
Still, it was to the woman lying facedown, all in plain dark
gray, that Suroth directed her attention. A wide collar of silvery
metal encircled the woman’s neck, connected by a shining leash
to a bracelet of the same material on the wrist of the second
sul’dam, Taisa. By means of leash and collar, the a’dam, Taisa
could control the gray-clad woman. And she had to be
controlled. She was damane, a woman who could channel,
and thus too dangerous to be allowed to run loose. Memories
of the Armies of the Night were still strong in Seanchan a
thousand years after their destruction.
Suroth’s eyes flickered uneasily to the two sul’dam. She no
longer trusted any sul’dam, and yet she had no choice but to
trust them. No one else could control the damane, and
without the damane . . . . The very concept was unthinkable.
The power of Seanchan, the very power of the Crystal Throne,
was built on controlled damane. There were too many things
about which Suroth had no choice to suit her. Such as Alwhin,
who watched as if she had been so’jhin all of her life. No. As
if she were of the Blood itself, and knelt because she chose to.
“Pura.” The damane had had another name when she was
one of the hated Aes Sedai, before falling into Seanchan hands,
but Suroth neither knew what it had been nor cared. The
gray-clad woman tensed, but did not raise her head; her
training had been particularly harsh. “I will ask again, Pura.
How does the White Tower control this man who calls himself
the Dragon Reborn?”
The damane moved her head a fraction, enough to shoot a
frightened look at Taisa. If her answer was displeasing, the
sul’dam could make her feel pain without raising a finger, by
means of the a’dam. “The Tower would not try to control a
false Dragon, High Lady,” Pura said breathily. “They would
capture him, and gentle him.”
Taisa looked an indignant question at the High Lady. The
answer had avoided Suroth’s query, had perhaps even implied
that one of the Blood had spoken untruth. Suroth gave a slight
shake of her head, the merest sideways motion—she had no
wish to wait while the damane recovered from
punishment—and Taisa bowed her head in acquiescence.
“Once again, Pura, what do you know of Aes Sedai . . .”
Suroth’s mouth twisted at being defiled with that name; Alwhin
gave a grunt of distaste “ . . . Aes Sedai aiding this man? I
warn you. Our soldiers fought women of the Tower, women
channeling the Power, at Falme, so do not attempt to deny it.”
“Pura . . . . Pura does not know, High Lady.” There was
urgency in the damane’s voice, and uncertainty; she darted
another wide-eyed glance at Taisa. It was clear that she wanted
desperately to be believed. “Perhaps . . . . Perhaps the Amyrlin,
or the Hall of the Tower . . . . No, they would not. Pura does
not know, High Lady.”
“The man can channel,” Suroth said curtly. The woman on
the floor moaned, though she had heard the same words from
Suroth before. Saying it again made Suroth’s stomach knot, but
she allowed nothing to show on her face. Little of what had
happened at Falme had been the work of women channeling;
damane could sense that, and the sul’dam wearing the bracelet
always knew what her damane felt. That meant it had to have
been the work of the man. It also meant he was incredibly
powerful. So powerful that Suroth had once or twice found
herself wondering, growing queasy, whether he might really be
the Dragon Reborn. That cannot be, she told herself firmly. In
any case, it made no difference to her plans. “It is impossible
to believe that even the White Tower would allow such a man
to walk free. How do they control him?”
The damane lay there silently, face to the floor, shoulders
shaking, weeping.
“Answer the High Lady!” Taisa said sharply. Taisa did not
move, but Pura gasped, flinching as if struck across the hips. A
blow delivered through the a’dam.
“P-Pura does not kn-know.” The damane stretched out a
hesitant hand as though to touch Suroth’s foot. “Please. Pura
has learned to obey. Pura speaks only the truth. Please do not
punish Pura.”
Suroth stepped back smoothly, letting none of her irritation
show. That she should be forced to move by a damane. That
she could almost be touched by one who could channel. She
felt a need to bathe, as if the touch had actually landed.
Taisa’s dark eyes bulged in outrage at the damane’s
effrontery; her cheeks were scarlet with shame that this should
happen while she wore the woman’s bracelet. She seemed torn
between prostrating herself beside the damane to beg
forgiveness and punishing the woman then and there. Alwhin
stared a thin-lipped contempt, every line of her face saying that
such things did not happen when she wore a bracelet.
Suroth raised one finger a fraction, making a small gesture
every so’jhin knew from childhood, a simple dismissal.
Alwhin hesitated before interpreting it, then tried to cover her
slip by rounding harshly on Taisa. “Take this . . . creature
from the presence of the High Lady Suroth. And when you
have punished her, go to Surela and tell her that you control
your charges as if you had never worn the bracelet before.
Tell her that you are to be—”
Suroth shut Alwhin’s voice from her mind. None of that had
been her command except the dismissal, but quarrels between
sul’dam were beneath her notice. She wished she knew
whether Pura was managing to hide something. Her agents
reported claims that the women of the White Tower could not
lie. It had not been possible to force Pura to tell even a simple
lie, to say that a white scarf was black, yet that was not
enough to be conclusive. Some might accept the tears of the
damane, her protests of inability whatever the sul’dam did,
but none who did would have risen to lead the Return. Pura
might have some reservoir of will left, might be clever enough
to try using the belief that she was incapable of lying. None of
the women collared on the mainland were fully obedient,
trustworthy, not like the damane brought from Seanchan. None
of them truly accepted what they were, as Seanchan damane
did. Who could say what secrets might hide in one who had
called herself Aes Sedai?
Not for the first time Suroth wished she had the other Aes
Sedai who had been captured on Toman Head. With two to
question, there would have been a better chance to catch lies
and evasions. It was a useless wish. The other could be dead,
drowned at sea, or on display at the Court of the Nine Moons.
Some of the ships Suroth had failed to gather in must have
managed the journey back across the ocean, and one might
well have carried the woman.
She herself had sent a ship carrying carefully crafted reports,
nearly half a year ago now, as soon as she had solidified her
control of the Forerunners, with a captain and crew from
families that had served hers since Luthair Paendrag had
proclaimed himself Emperor, nearly a thousand years ago.
Dispatching the ship had been a gamble, for the Empress
might send back someone to take Suroth’s place. Not sending
the vessel would have been a greater, though; only utter and
crushing victory could have saved her then. Perhaps not even
that. So the Empress knew of Falme, knew of Turak’s disaster
and Suroth’s intention to go on. But what did she think of that
knowledge, and what was she doing about it? That was a
greater concern than any damane, whatever she had been
before collaring.
Yet the Empress did not know everything. The worst could
not be entrusted to any messenger, no matter how loyal. It
would only be passed from Suroth’s lips directly to the ear of
the Empress, and Suroth had taken pains to keep it so. Only
four still lived who knew the secret, and two of those would
never speak of it to anyone, not of their own volition. Only
three deaths can hold it more tightly.
Suroth did not realize she had murmured the last aloud until
Alwhin said, “And yet the High Lady needs all three alive.” The
woman had a properly humble suppleness to her stance, even
to the trick of downcast eyes that still managed to watch for
any sign from Suroth. Her voice was humble, too. “Who can
say, High Lady, what the Empress—may she live
forever!—might do if she learned of an attempt to keep such
knowledge from her?”
Instead of answering, Suroth made the tiny dismissing gesture
once more. Again Alwhin hesitated—this time it had to be
simple reluctance to leave; the woman rose above
herself!—before bowing deeply and backing out of Suroth’s
presence.
With an effort Suroth found calmness. The sul’dam and the
other two were a problem she could not solve now, but
patience was a necessity for the Blood. Those who lacked it
were likely to end in the Tower of Ravens.
On the terrace, kneeling servants leaned forward a hair in
readiness as she appeared again. The soldiers maintained their
watch to see she was undisturbed. Suroth took up her place
before the balustrade, this time staring out to sea, toward the
mainland hundreds of miles to the east.
To be the one who successfully led the Forerunners, who
began the Return, would bring much honor. Perhaps even
adoption into the family of the Empress, though that was an
honor not without complications. To also be the one who
captured this Dragon, whether false or real, along with the
means of controlling his incredible power . . . .
But if—when I take him, do I give him to the Empress?
That is the question.
Her long nails began to click again on the wide stone rail.

Inland the hot night wind blew, north across the vast delta
called the Fingers of the Dragon, a winding maze of waterways
broad and narrow, some choked with knifegrass. Vast plains of
reeds separated clusters of low islands forested with
spider-rooted trees seen nowhere else. Eventually the delta gave
way to its source, the River Erinin, the river’s great width
spotted with the lights of small boats lantern-fishing. Boats and
lights bobbed wildly, sudden and unexpected, and some older
men muttered of evil things passing in the night. Young men
laughed, but they hauled the nets more vigorously, too, eager
to be home and out of the dark. The stories said evil could
not cross your threshold unless you invited it in. That was
what the stories said. But out in the darkness . . . .
The last tang of salt had vanished by the time the wind
reached the great city of Tear, hard by the river, where
tile-roofed inns and shops shouldered against tall, towered
palaces gleaming in the moonlight. Yet no place was half so tall
as the massive bulk, almost a mountain, that stretched from
city’s heart to water’s edge. The Stone of Tear, fortress of
legend, the oldest stronghold of mankind, erected in the last
days of the Breaking of the World. While nations and empires
rose and fell, were replaced and fell anew, the Stone stood. It
was the rock on which armies had broken spears and swords
and hearts for three thousand years. And in all that time it
had never fallen to invading arms. Until now.
The streets of the city, the taverns and inns, were all but
empty in the muggy darkness, people keeping cautiously within
their own walls. Who held the Stone was lord of Tear, city and
nation. That was the way it had always been, and the people
of Tear accepted it always. By daylight they would cheer their
new lord with enthusiasm as they had cheered the old; by
night they huddled together, shivering despite the heat when
the wind howled across their rooftops like a thousand keening
mourners. Strange new hopes danced in their heads, hopes
none in Tear had dared for a hundred generations, hopes
mixed with fears as old as the Breaking.
The wind lashed the long, white banner catching the moon
above the Stone as if trying to rip it away. Along its length
marched a sinuous figure like a legged serpent, golden-maned
like a lion, scaled in scarlet and gold, seeming to ride the wind.
Banner of prophecy, hoped for and dreaded. Banner of the
Dragon. The Dragon Reborn. Harbinger of the world’s
salvation, and herald of a new Breaking to come. As if
outraged at such defiance, the wind dashed itself against the
hard walls of the Stone. The Dragon banner floated, unheeding
in the night, awaiting greater storms.
In a room more than halfway up the Stone’s southern face,
Perrin sat on the chest at the foot of his canopied bed and
watched the dark-haired young woman pacing up and down.
There was a trace of wariness in his golden eyes. Usually Faile
bantered with him, maybe poked a little gentle fun at his
deliberate ways; tonight she had not said ten words since
coming through the door. He could smell the rose petals that
had been folded into her clothes after cleaning, and the scent
that was just her. And in the hint of clean perspiration, he
smelled nervousness. Faile almost never showed nerves.
Wondering why she did now set an itch between his shoulders
that had nothing to do with the night’s heat. Her narrow,
divided skirts made a soft whisk-whisk-whisk with her strides.
He scratched his two-week growth of beard irritably. It was
even curlier than the hair on his head. It was also hot. For
the hundredth time he thought of shaving.
“It suits you,” Faile said suddenly, stopping in her tracks.
Uncomfortably, he shrugged shoulders heavy from long hours
working at a forge. She did that sometimes, seemed to know
what he was thinking. “It itches,” he muttered, and wished he
had spoken more forcefully. It was his beard; he could shave
it off any time he wanted.
She studied him, her head tilted to one side. Her bold nose
and high cheekbones made it seem a fierce study, a contrast
to the soft voice in which she said, “It looks right on you.”
Perrin sighed, and shrugged again. She had not asked him to
keep the beard, and she would not. Yet he knew he was
going to put off shaving again. He wondered how his friend
Mat would handle this situation. Probably with a pinch and a
kiss and some remark that made her laugh until he brought
her around to his way of thinking. But Perrin knew he did not
have Mat’s way with the girls. Mat would never find himself
sweating behind a beard just because a woman thought he
should have hair on his face. Unless, maybe, the woman was
Faile. Perrin suspected that her father must deeply regret her
leaving home, and not just because she was his daughter. He
was the biggest fur trader in Saldaea, so she claimed, and
Perrin could see her getting the price she wanted every time.
“Something is troubling you, Faile, and it isn’t my beard.
What is it?”
Her expression became guarded. She looked everywhere but
at him, making a contemptuous survey of the room’s
furnishings.
Carvings of leopards and lions, stooping hawks and hunting
scenes decorated everything from the tall wardrobe and
bedposts as thick as his leg to the padded bench in front of
the cold marble fireplace. Some of the animals had garnet eyes.
He had tried to convince the majhere that he wanted a
simple room, but she did not seem to understand. Not that
she was stupid or slow. The majhere commanded an army of
servants greater in numbers than the Defenders of the Stone;
whoever commanded the Stone, whoever held its walls, she
saw to the day-to-day matters that let everything function. But
she looked at the world through Tairen eyes. Despite his
clothes, he must be more than the young countryman he
seemed, because commoners were never housed in the
Stone—save for Defenders and servants, of course. Beyond that,
he was one of Rand’s party, a friend or a follower or in any
case close to the Dragon Reborn in some way. To the
majhere, that set him on a level with a Lord of the Land at
the very least, if not a High Lord. She had been scandalized
enough at putting him in here, without even a sitting room; he
thought she might have fainted if he had insisted on an even
plainer chamber. If there were such things short of the
servants’ quarters, or the Defenders’. At least nothing here was
gilded except the candlesticks.
Faile’s opinions, though, were not his. “You should have
better than this. You deserve it. You can wager your last
copper that Mat has better.”
“Mat likes gaudy things,” he said simply.
“You do not stand up for yourself.”
He did not comment. It was not his rooms that made her
smell of unease, any more than his beard.
After a moment, she said, “The Lord Dragon seems to have
lost interest in you. All his time is taken by the High Lords,
now.”
The itch between his shoulders worsened; he knew what was
troubling her now. He tried to make his voice light. “The Lord
Dragon? You sound like a Tairen. His name is Rand.”
“He’s your friend, Perrin Aybara, not mine. If a man like that
has friends.” She drew a deep breath and went on in a more
moderate tone. “I have been thinking about leaving the Stone.
Leaving Tear. I don’t think Moiraine would try to stop me.
News of . . . of Rand has been leaving the city for two weeks,
now. She can’t think to keep him secret any longer.”
He only just stopped another sigh. “I don’t think she will,
either. If anything, I think she considers you a complication.
She will probably give you money to see you on your way.”
Planting fists on hips, she moved to stare down at him. “Is
that all you have to say?”
“What do you want me to say? That I want you to stay?”
The anger in his own voice startled him. He was angry with
himself, not her. Angry because he had not seen this coming,
angry because he could not see how to deal with it. He liked
being able to think things through. It was easy to hurt people
without meaning to when you were hasty. He’d done that now.
Her dark eyes were large with shock. He tried to smooth his
words. “I do want you to stay, Faile, but maybe you should
leave. I know you’re no coward, but the Dragon Reborn, the
Forsaken . . . .” Not that anywhere was really safe—not for
long, not now—yet there were safer places than the Stone. For
a while, anyway. Not that he was stupid enough to put it to
her that way.
But she did not appear to care how he put it. “Stay? The
Light illumine me! Anything is better than sitting here like a
boulder, but . . . .” She knelt gracefully in front of him, resting
her hands on his knees. “Perrin. I do not like wondering when
one of the Forsaken is going to walk around the corner in
front of me, and I do not like wondering when the Dragon
Reborn is going to kill us all. He did it back in the Breaking,
after all. Killed everyone close to him.”
“Rand isn’t Lews Therin Kinslayer,” Perrin protested. “I mean,
he is the Dragon Reborn, but he isn’t . . . he wouldn’t . . . .”
He trailed off, not knowing how to finish. Rand was Lews
Therin Telamon reborn; that was what being the Dragon
Reborn meant. But did it mean Rand was doomed to Lews
Therin’s fate? Not just going mad—any man who channeled
had that fate in front of him, and then a rotting death—but
killing everyone who cared for him?
“I have been talking to Bain and Chiad, Perrin.”
That was no surprise. She spent considerable time with the
Aiel women. The friendship made some trouble for her, but
she seemed to like the Aiel women as much as she despised
the Stone’s Tairen noblewomen. But he saw no connection to
what they were talking about, and he said so.
“They say Moiraine sometimes asks where you are. Or Mat.
Don’t you see? She would not have to do that if she could
watch you with the Power.”
“Watch me with the Power?” he said faintly. He had never
even considered that.
“She cannot. Come with me, Perrin. We can be twenty miles
across the river before she misses us.”
“I can’t,” he said miserably. He tried diverting her with a kiss,
but she leaped to her feet and backed away so fast he nearly
fell on his face. There was no point going after her. She had
her arms crossed beneath her breasts like a barrier.
“Don’t tell me you are that afraid of her. I know she is Aes
Sedai, and she has all of you dancing when she twitches the
strings. Perhaps she has the . . . Rand . . . so tied he cannot
get loose, and the Light knows Egwene and Elayne, and even
Nynaeve, don’t want to, but you can break her cords if you
try.”
“It has nothing to do with Moiraine. It’s what I have to do.
I—”
She cut him short. “Don’t you dare hand me any of that
hairy-chested drivel about a man having to do his duty. I
know duty as well as you, and you have no duty here. You
may be ta’veren, even if I don’t see it, but he is the Dragon
Reborn, not you.”
“Will you listen?” he shouted, glaring, and she jumped. He
had never shouted at her before, not like that. She raised her
chin and shifted her shoulders, but she did not say anything.
He went on. “I think I am part of Rand’s destiny, somehow.
Mat, too. I think he can’t do what he has to unless we do
our part, as well. That is the duty. How can I walk away if it
might mean Rand will fail?”
“Might?” There was a hint of demand in her voice, but only
a hint. He wondered if he could make himself shout at her
more often. “Did Moiraine tell you this, Perrin? You should
know by now to listen closely to what an Aes Sedai says.”
“I worked it out for myself. I think ta’veren are pulled
toward each other. Or maybe Rand pulls us, Mat and me
both. He’s supposed to be the strongest ta’veren since Artur
Hawkwing, maybe since the Breaking. Mat won’t even admit
he’s ta’veren, but however he tries to get away, he always
ends up drawn back to Rand. Loial says he has never heard
of three ta’veren
, all the same age and all from the same
place.”
Faile sniffed loudly. “Loial does not know everything. He isn’t
very old for an Ogier.”
“He’s past ninety,” Perrin said defensively, and she gave him
a tight smile. For an Ogier, ninety years was not much older
than Perrin. Or maybe younger. He did not know much about
Ogier. In any case, Loial had read more books than Perrin
had ever seen or even heard of; sometimes he thought Loial
had read every book ever printed. “And he knows more than
you or I do. He believes maybe I have the right of it. And so
does Moiraine. No, I haven’t asked her, but why else does she
keep a watch on me? Did you think she wanted me to make
her a kitchen knife?”
She was silent for a moment, and when she spoke it was in
sympathetic tones. “Poor Perrin. I left Saldaea to find
adventure, and now that I’m in the heart of one, the greatest
since the Breaking, all I want is to go somewhere else. You
just want to be a blacksmith, and you’re going to end up in
the stories whether you want it or not.”
He looked away, though the scent of her still filled his head.
He did not think he was likely to have any stories told about
him, not unless his secret spread a long way beyond the few
who knew already. Faile thought she knew everything about
him, but she was wrong.
An axe and a hammer leaned against the wall opposite him,
each plain and functional, with a haft as long as his forearm.
The axe was a wicked half-moon blade balanced by a thick
spike, meant for violence. With the hammer he could make
things, had made things, at a forge. The hammerhead weighed
more than twice as much as the axe blade, but it was the axe
that felt heavier by far every time he picked it up. With the
axe, he had . . . . He scowled, not wanting to think about
that. She was right. All he wanted was to be a blacksmith, to
go home, and see his family again, and work at the smithy.
But it was not to be; he knew that.
He got to his feet long enough to pick up the hammer, then
sat back down. There was something comforting in holding it.
“Master Luhhan always says you can’t walk away from what
has to be done.” He hurried on, realizing that was a little too
close to what she had called hairy-chested drivel. “He’s the
blacksmith back home, the man I was apprenticed to. I’ve told
you about him.”
To his surprise, she did not take the opportunity to point out
his near echo. In fact, she said nothing, only looked at him,
waiting for something. After a moment it came to him.
“Are you leaving, then?” he asked.
She stood up, brushing her skirt. For a long moment she
kept silent, as if deciding on her answer. “I do not know,” she
said finally. “This is a fine mess you’ve put me in.”
“Me? What did I do?”
“Well, if you don’t know, I am certainly not going to tell
you.”
Scratching his beard again, he stared at the hammer in his
other hand. Mat would probably know exactly what she meant.
Or even old Thom Merrilin. The white-haired gleeman claimed
no one understood women, but when he came out of his tiny
room in the belly of the Stone he soon had half a dozen girls
young enough to be his granddaughters sighing and listening to
him play the harp and tell of grand adventure and romance.
Faile was the only woman Perrin wanted, but sometimes he felt
like a fish trying to understand a bird.
He knew she wanted him to ask. He knew that much. She
might or might not tell him, but he was supposed to ask.
Stubbornly he kept his mouth shut. This time he meant to wait
her out.
Outside in the darkness, a cock crowed.
Faile shivered and hugged herself. “My nurse used to say
that meant a death coming. Not that I believe it, of course.”
He opened his mouth to agree it was foolishness, though he
shivered, too, but his head whipped around at a grating sound
and a thump. The axe had toppled to the floor. He only had
time to frown, wondering what could have made it fall, when it
shifted again, untouched, then leaped straight for him.
He swung the hammer without thought. Metal ringing on
metal drowned Faile’s scream; the axe flew across the room,
bounced off the far wall, and darted back at him, blade first.
He thought every hair on his body was trying to stand on
end.
As the axe sped by her, Faile lunged forward and grabbed
the haft with both hands. It twisted in her grip, slashing toward
her wide-eyed face. Barely in time Perrin leaped up, dropping
the hammer to seize the axe, just keeping the half-moon blade
from her flesh. He thought he would die if the axe—his
axe—harmed her. He jerked it away from her so hard that the
heavy spike nearly stabbed him in the chest. It would have
been a fair trade, to stop the axe from hurting her, but with a
sinking feeling he began to think it might not be possible.
The weapon thrashed like a thing alive, a thing with a
malevolent will. It wanted Perrin—he knew that as if it had
shouted at him—but it fought with cunning. When he pulled
the axe away from Faile, it used his own movement to hack at
him; when he forced it from himself, it tried to reach her, as if
it knew that would make him stop pushing. No matter how
hard he held the haft, it spun in his hands, threatening with
spike or curved blade. Already his hands ached from the effort,
and his thick arms strained, muscles tight. Sweat rolled down
his face. He was not sure how much longer it would be before
the axe fought free of his grip. This was all madness, pure
madness, with no time to think.
“Get out,” he muttered through gritted teeth. “Get out of the
room, Faile!”
Her face was bloodless pale, but she shook her head and
wrestled with the axe. “No! I will not leave you!”
“It will kill both of us!”
She shook her head again.
Growling in his throat, he let go of the axe with one
hand—his arm quivered with holding the thing one-handed; the
twisting haft burned his palm—and thrust Faile away. She
yelped as he wrestled her to the door. Ignoring her shouts
and her fists pounding at him, he held her against the wall
with a shoulder until he could pull the door open and shove
her into the hallway.
Slamming the door behind her, he put his back against it,
sliding the latch home with his hip as he seized the axe with
both hands again. The heavy blade, gleaming and sharp,
trembled within inches of his face. Laboriously, he pushed it
out to arm’s length. Faile’s muted shouts penetrated the thick
door, and he could feel her beating on it, but he was barely
conscious of her. His yellow eyes seemed to shine, as if they
reflected every scrap of light in the room.
“Just you and me, now,” he snarled at the axe. “Blood and
ashes, how I hate you!” Inside, a part of him came close to
hysterical laughter. Rand is the one who’s supposed to go
mad, and here I am, talking to an axe! Rand! Burn him!
Teeth bared with effort, he forced the axe back a full step
from the door. The weapon vibrated, fighting to reach flesh; he
could almost taste its thirst for his blood. With a roar he
suddenly pulled the curved blade toward him, threw himself
back. Had the axe truly been alive, he was sure he would
have heard a cry of triumph as it flashed toward his head. At
the last instant, he twisted, driving the axe past himself. With a
heavy thunk the blade buried itself in the door.
He felt the life—he could not think what else to call it—go out
of the imprisoned weapon. Slowly, he took his hands away.
The axe stayed where it was, only steel and wood again. The
door seemed a good place to leave it for now, though. He
wiped sweat from his face with a shaking hand. Madness.
Madness walks wherever Rand is.
Abruptly he realized he could no longer hear Faile’s shouts,
or her pounding. Throwing back the latch, he hastily pulled the
door open. A gleaming arc of steel stuck through the thick
wood on the outside, shining in the light of wide-spaced lamps
along the tapestry-hung hallway.
Faile stood there, hands raised, frozen in the act of beating
on the door. Eyes wide and wondering, she touched the tip of
her nose. “Another inch,” she said faintly, “and . . . .”
With a sudden start, she flung herself on him, hugging him
fiercely, raining kisses on his neck and beard between
incoherent murmurs. Just as quickly, she pushed back, running
anxious hands over his chest and arms. “Are you hurt? Are
you injured? Did it . . . ?”
“I’m all right,” he told her. “But are you? I did not mean to
frighten you.”
She peered up at him. “Truly? You are not hurt in any
way?”
“Completely unhurt. I—” Her full-armed slap made his head
ring like hammer on anvil.
“You great hairy lummox! I thought you were dead! I was
afraid it had killed you! I thought—!” She cut off as he caught
her second slap in mid-swing.
“Please don’t do that again,” he said quietly. The smarting
imprint of her hand burned on his cheek, and he thought his
jaw would ache the rest of the night.
He gripped her wrist as gently as he would have a bird, but
though she struggled to pull free, his hand did not budge an
inch. Compared to swinging a hammer all day at the forge,
holding her was no effort at all, even after his fight against the
axe. Abruptly she seemed to decide to ignore his grip and
stared him in the eye; neither dark nor golden eyes blinked. “I
could have helped you. You had no right—”
“I had every right,” he said firmly. “You could not have
helped. If you had stayed, we’d both be dead. I couldn’t have
fought—not the way I had to—and kept you safe, too.” She
opened her mouth, but he raised his voice and went on. “I
know you hate the word. I’ll try my best not to treat you like
porcelain, but if you ask me to watch you die, I will tie you
like a lamb for market and send you off to Mistress Luhhan.
She won’t stand for any such nonsense.”
Tonguing a tooth and wondering if it was loose, he almost
wished he could see Faile trying to ride roughshod over Alsbet
Luhhan. The blacksmith’s wife kept her husband in line with
scarcely more effort than she needed for her house. Even
Nynaeve had been careful of her sharp tongue around Mistress
Luhhan. The tooth still held tight, he decided.
Faile laughed suddenly, a low, throaty laugh. “You would, too,
wouldn’t you? Don’t think you would not dance with the Dark
One if you tried, though.”
Perrin was so startled he let go of her. He could not see
any real difference between what he had just said and what
he had said before, but the one had made her blaze up, while
this she took . . . fondly. Not that he was certain the threat to
kill him was entirely a joke. Faile carried knives hidden about
her person, and she knew how to use them.
She rubbed her wrist ostentatiously and muttered something
under her breath. He caught the words “hairy ox,” and
promised himself he would shave every last whisker of that fool
beard. He would.
Aloud, she said, “The axe. That was him, wasn’t it? The
Dragon Reborn, trying to kill us.”
“It must have been Rand.” He emphasized the name. He did
not like thinking of Rand the other way. He preferred
remembering the Rand he had grown up with in Emond’s
Field. “Not trying to kill us, though. Not him.”
She gave him a wry smile, more a grimace. “If he was not
trying, I hope he never does.”
“I don’t know what he was doing. But I mean to tell him to
stop it, and right now.”
“I don’t know why I care for a man who worries so about
his own safety,” she murmured.
He frowned at her quizzically, wondering what she meant, but
she only tucked her arm through his. He was still wondering
as they started off through the Stone. The axe he left where it
was; stuck in the door, it would not harm anyone.
 
 
Teeth clamped on a long-stemmed pipe, Mat opened his coat a
bit more and tried to concentrate on the cards lying facedown
in front of him, and on the coins spilled in the middle of the
table. He had had the bright red coat made to an Andoran
pattern, of the best wool, with golden embroidery scrolling
around the cuffs and long collar, but day by day he was
reminded how much farther south Tear lay than Andor. Sweat
ran down his face, and plastered the shirt to his back.
None of his companions around the table appeared to notice
the heat at all, despite coats that looked even heavier than his,
with fat, swollen sleeves, all padded silks and brocades and
satin stripes. Two men in red-and-gold livery kept the gamblers’
silver cups full of wine and proffered shining silver trays of
olives and cheeses and nuts. The heat did not seem to affect
the servants, either, though now and again one of them
yawned behind his hand when he thought no one was looking.
The night was not young.
Mat refrained from lifting his cards to check them again.
They would not have changed. Three rulers, the highest cards
in three of the five suits, were already good enough to win
most hands.
He would have been more comfortable dicing; there was
seldom a deck of cards to be found in the places he usually
gambled, where silver changed hands in fifty different dice
games, but these young Tairen lordlings would rather wear
rags than play at dice. Peasants tossed dice, though they were
careful not to say so in his hearing. It was not his temper
they feared, but who they thought his friends were. This game
called chop was what they played, hour after hour, night after
night, using cards hand-painted and lacquered by a man in the
city who had been made well-to-do by these fellows and others
like them. Only women or horses could draw them away, but
neither for long.
Still, he had picked up the game quickly enough, and if his
luck was not as good as it was with dice, it would do. A fat
purse lay beside his cards, and another even fatter rested in
his pocket. A fortune, he would have thought once, back in
Emond’s Field, enough to live the rest of his life in luxury. His
ideas of luxury had changed since leaving the Two Rivers. The
young lords kept their coin in careless, shining piles, but some
old habits he had no intention of changing. In the taverns and
inns it was sometimes necessary to depart quickly. Especially if
his luck was really with him.
When he had enough to keep himself as he wanted, he
would leave the Stone just as quickly. Before Moiraine knew
what he was thinking. He would have been days gone by now,
if he had had his way. It was just that there was gold to be
had here. One night at this table could earn him more than a
week of dicing in taverns. If only his luck would catch.
He put on a small frown and puffed worriedly at his pipe, to
look unsure whether his cards were good enough to go on
with. Two of the young lords had pipes in their teeth, too, but
silver-worked, with amber bits. In the hot, still air, their
perfumed tabac smelled like a fire in a lady’s dressing chamber.
Not that Mat had ever been in a lady’s dressing chamber. An
illness that nearly killed him had left his memory as full of
holes as the best lace, yet he was sure he would have
remembered that. Not even the Dark One would be mean
enough to make me forget that.
“Sea Folk ship docked today,” Reimon muttered around his
pipe. The broad-shouldered young lord’s beard was oiled and
trimmed to a neat point. That was the latest fashion among
the younger lords, and Reimon chased the latest fashion as
assiduously as he chased women. Which was only a little less
diligently than he gambled. He tossed a silver crown onto the
pile in the middle of the table for another card. “A raker.
Fastest ships there are, rakers, so they say. Outrun the wind,
they say. I would like to see that. Burn my soul, but I would.”
He did not bother to look at the card he was dealt; he never
did until he had a full five.
The plump, pink-cheeked man between Reimon and Mat gave
an amused chuckle. “You want to see the ship, Reimon? You
mean the girls, do you not? The women. Exotic Sea Folk
beauties, with their rings and baubles and swaying walks, eh?”
He put in a crown and took his card, grimacing when he
peeked at it. That meant nothing; going by his face, Edorion’s
cards were always low and mismatched. He won more than he
lost, though. “Well, perhaps my luck will be better with the Sea
Folk girls.”
The dealer, tall and slender on Mat’s other side, with a
pointed beard even more darkly luxuriant than Reimon’s, laid a
finger alongside his nose. “You think to be lucky with those,
Edorion? The way they keep to themselves, you’ll be lucky to
catch a whiff of their perfume.” He made a wafting gesture,
inhaling deeply with a sigh, and the other lordlings laughed,
even Edorion.
A plain-faced youth named Estean laughed loudest of all,
scrubbing a hand through lank hair that kept falling over his
forehead. Replace his fine yellow coat with drab wool, and he
could have passed for a farmer, instead of the son of a High
Lord with the richest estates in Tear and in his own right the
wealthiest man at the table. He had also drunk much more
wine than any of the others.
Swaying across the man next to him, a foppish fellow named
Baran who always seemed to be looking down his sharp nose,
Estean poked the dealer with a none too steady finger. Baran
leaned back, twisting his mouth around his pipestem as if he
feared Estean might throw up.
“That’s good, Carlomin,” Estean gurgled. “You think so too,
don’t you, Baran? Edorion won’t get a sniff. If he wants to try
his luck . . . take a gamble . . . he ought to go after the Aiel
wenches, like Mat, here. All those spears and knives. Burn my
soul. Like asking a lion to dance.” Dead silence dropped
around the table. Estean laughed on alone, then blinked and
scrubbed fingers through his hair again. “What’s the matter?
Did I say something? Oh! Oh, yes. Them.”
Mat barely stopped a scowl. The fool had to bring up the
Aiel. The only worse subject would have been Aes Sedai; they
would almost rather have Aiel walking the corridors, staring
down any Tairen who got in their way, than even one Aes
Sedai, and these men thought they had four, at least. He
fingered an Andoran silver crown from his purse on the table
and pushed it into the pot. Carlomin dealt out the card slowly.
Mat lifted it carefully with a thumbnail, and did not let himself
so much as blink. The Ruler of Cups, a High Lord of Tear.
The rulers in a deck varied according to the land where the
cards were made, with the nation’s own ruler always as Ruler
of Cups, the highest suit. These cards were old. He had
already seen new decks with Rand’s face or something like it
on the Ruler of Cups, complete with the Dragon banner. Rand
the ruler of Tear; that still seemed ludicrous enough to make
him want to pinch himself. Rand was a shepherd, a good
fellow to have fun with when he was not going all over-serious
and responsible. Rand the Dragon Reborn, now; that told him
he was a stone fool to be sitting there, where Moiraine could
put her hand on him whenever she wanted, waiting to see
what Rand would do next. Maybe Thom Merrilin would go
with him. Or Perrin. Only, Thom seemed to be settling into the
Stone as if he never meant to leave, and Perrin was not going
anywhere unless Faile crooked a finger. Well, Mat was ready to
travel alone, if need be.
Yet there was silver in the middle of the table and gold in
front of the lordlings, and if he was dealt the fifth ruler, there
was no hand in chop could beat him. Not that he really
needed it. Suddenly he could feel luck tickling his mind. Not
tingling as it did with the dice, of course, but he was already
certain no one was going to beat four rulers. The Tairens had
been betting wildly all night, the price of ten farms crossing the
table on the quickest hands.
But Carlomin was staring at the deck of cards in his hand
instead of buying his fourth, and Baran was puffing his pipe
furiously and stacking the coins in front of him as if ready to
stuff them into his pockets. Reimon wore a scowl behind his
beard, and Edorion was frowning at his nails. Only Estean
appeared unaffected; he grinned uncertainly around the table,
perhaps already forgetting what he had said. They usually
managed to put some sort of good face on the situation if the
Aiel came up, but the hour was late, and the wine had flowed
freely.
Mat scoured his mind for a way to keep them and their gold
from walking away from his cards. One glance at their faces
was enough to tell him that simply changing the subject would
not be enough. But there was another way. If he made them
laugh at the Aiel . . . . Is it worth making them laugh at
me, too? Chewing his pipestem, he tried to think of something
else.
Baran picked up a stack of gold in each hand and moved to
stick them in his pockets.
“I might just try these Sea Folk women,” Mat said quickly,
taking his pipe to gesture with. “Odd things happen when you
chase Aiel girls. Very odd. Like the game they call Maidens’
Kiss.” He had their attention, but Baran had not put down the
coins, and Carlomin still showed no sign of buying a card.
Estean gave a drunken guffaw. “Kiss you with steel in your
ribs, I suppose. Maidens of the Spear, you see. Steel. Spear in
your ribs. Burn my soul.” No one else laughed. But they were
listening.
“Not quite.” Mat managed a grin. Burn me, I’ve told this
much. I might as well tell the rest. “Rhuarc said if I wanted
to get along with the Maidens, I should ask them how to play
Maidens’ Kiss. He said that was the best way to get to know
them.” It still sounded like one of the kissing games back
home, like Kiss the Daisies. He had never considered the Aiel
clan chief a man to play tricks. He would be warier the next
time. He made an effort to improve the grin. “So I went along
to Bain and . . .” Reimon frowned impatiently. None of them
knew any Aiel’s name but Rhuarc, and none of them wanted
to. Mat dropped the names and hurried on “ . . . went along
dumb as a bull-goose fool, and asked them to show me.” He
should have suspected something from the wide smiles that had
bloomed on their faces. Like cats who had been asked to
dance by a mouse. “Before I knew what was happening, I had
a fistful of spears around my neck like a collar. I could have
shaved myself with one sneeze.”
The others around the table exploded in laughter, from
Reimon’s wheezing to Estean’s wine-soaked bray.
Mat left them to it. He could almost feel the spearpoints
again, pricking if he so much as twitched a finger. Bain,
laughing all the while, had told him she had never heard of a
man actually asking to play Maidens’ Kiss.
Carlomin stroked his beard and spoke into Mat’s hesitation.
“You cannot stop there. Go on. When was this? Two nights
ago, I’ll wager. When you didn’t come for the game, and no
one knew where you were.”
“I was playing stones with Thom Merrilin that night,” Mat
said quickly. “This was days ago.” He was glad he could lie
with a straight face. “They each took a kiss. That’s all. If she
thought it was a good kiss, they eased up with the spears. If
not, they pushed a little harder; to encourage, you might say.
That was all. I’ll tell you this; I got nicked less than I do
shaving.”
He stuck his pipe back between his teeth. If they wanted to
know more, they could go ask to play the game themselves.
He almost hoped some of them were fool enough. Bloody Aiel
women and their bloody spears. He had not made it to his
own bed until daybreak.
“It would be more than enough for me,” Carlomin said dryly.
“The Light burn my soul if it would not.” He tossed a silver
crown into the center of the table and dealt himself another
card. “Maidens’ Kiss.” He shook with mirth, and another ripple
of laughter ran around the table.
Baran bought his fifth card, and Estean fumbled a coin from
the heap scattered in front of him, peering at it to see what it
was. They would not stop now.
“Savages,” Baran muttered around his pipe. “Ignorant savages.
That is all they are, burn my soul. Live in caves, out in the
Waste. In caves! No one but a savage could live in the Waste.”
Reimon nodded. “At least they serve the Lord Dragon. I
would take a hundred Defenders and clean them out of the
Stone, if not for that.” Baran and Carlomin growled fierce
agreement.
It was no effort for Mat to keep his face straight. He had
heard much the same before. Boasting was easy when no one
expected you to carry through. A hundred Defenders? Even if
Rand stood aside for some reason, the few hundred Aiel
holding the Stone could probably keep it against any army
Tear could raise. Not that they seemed to want the Stone,
really. Mat suspected they were only there because Rand was.
He did not think any of these lordlings had figured that
out—they tried to ignore the Aiel as much as possible—but he
doubted it would make them feel any better.
“Mat.” Estean fanned his cards out in one hand, rearranging
them as if he could not decide what order they were meant to
go in. “Mat, you will speak to the Lord Dragon, won’t you?”
“About what?” Mat asked cautiously. Too many of these
Tairens knew he and Rand had grown up together to suit
him, and they seemed to think he was arm in arm with Rand
whenever he was out of their sight. None of them would have
gone near his own brother if he could channel. He did not
know why they thought him a bigger fool.
“Didn’t I say?” The plain-faced man squinted at his cards and
scratched his head, then brightened. “Oh, yes. His proclamation,
Mat. The Lord Dragon’s. His last one. Where he said
commoners had the right to call lords before a magistrate.
Who ever heard of a lord being summoned to a magistrate?
And for peasants!”
Mat’s hand tightened on his purse until the coins inside
grated together. “It would be a shame,” he said quietly, “if you
were tried and judged just for having your way with a
fisherman’s daughter whatever she wanted, or for having some
farmer beaten for splashing mud on your cloak.”
The others shifted uneasily, catching his mood, but Estean
nodded, head bobbing so it seemed about to fall off. “Exactly.
Though it wouldn’t come to that, of course. A lord being tried
before a magistrate? Of course not. Not really.” He laughed
drunkenly at his cards. “No fishermen’s daughters. Smell of
fish, you see, however you have them washed. A plump farm
girl is best.”
Mat told himself he was there to gamble. He told himself to
ignore the fool’s blather, reminded himself of how much gold
he could take out of Estean’s purse. His tongue did not listen,
though. “Who knows what it might come to? Hangings,
maybe.”
Edorion gave him a sidelong look, guarded and uneasy. “Do
we have to talk about . . . about commoners, Estean? What
about old Astoril’s daughters? Have you decided which you’ll
marry yet?”
“What? Oh. Oh, I’ll flip a coin, I suppose.” Estean frowned at
his cards, shifted one, and frowned again. “Medore has two or
three pretty maids. Perhaps Medore.”
Mat took a long drink from his silver winecup to keep from
hitting the man in his farmer’s face. He was still on his first
cup; the two servants had given up trying to add more. If he
hit Estean, none of them would lift a hand to stop him. Not
even Estean. Because he was the Lord Dragon’s friend. He
wished he was in a tavern somewhere out in the city, where
some dockman might question his luck and only a quick
tongue, or quick feet, or quick hands would see him leave with
a whole skin. Now that was a fool thought.
Edorion glanced at Mat again, measuring his mood. “I heard
a rumor today. I hear the Lord Dragon is taking us to war
with Illian.”
Mat gagged on his wine. “War?” he spluttered.
“War,” Reimon agreed happily around his pipestem.
“Are you certain?” Carlomin said, and Baran added, “I’ve
heard no rumors.”
“I heard it just today, from three or four tongues.” Edorion
seemed to be absorbed in his cards. “Who can say how true
it is?”
“It must be true,” Reimon said. “With the Lord Dragon to
lead us, holding Callandor, we’ll not even have to fight. He
will scatter their armies, and we will march straight into Illian.
Too bad, in a way. Burn my soul if it isn’t. I would like a
chance to match swords with the Illianers.”
“You’ll get no chance with the Lord Dragon leading,” Baran
said. “They will fall on their knees as soon as they see the
Dragon banner.”
“And if they do not,” Carlomin added with a laugh, “the Lord
Dragon will blast them with lightning where they stand.”
“Illian first,” Reimon said. “And then . . . then we’ll conquer
the world for the Lord Dragon. You tell him I said so, Mat.
The whole world.”
Mat shook his head. A month gone, they would have been
horrified by even the idea of a man who could channel, a
man doomed to go mad and die horribly. Now they were
ready to follow Rand into battle, and trust his power to win
for them. Trust the Power, though it was not likely they would
put it that way. Yet he supposed they had to find something
to hang on to. The invincible Stone was in the hands of the
Aiel. The Dragon Reborn was in his chambers a hundred feet
above their heads, and Callandor was with him. Three
thousand years of Tairen belief and history lay in ruins, and
the world had been turned on its head. He wondered whether
he had handled it any better; his own world had gone all
askew in little more than a year. He rolled a gold Tairen
crown across the backs of his fingers. However well he had
done, he would not go back.
“When will we march, Mat?” Baran asked.
“I don’t know,” he said slowly. “I don’t think Rand would
start a war.” Unless he had gone mad already. That hardly
bore thinking about.
The others looked as if he had assured them the sun would
not come up tomorrow.
“We are all loyal to the Lord Dragon, of course.” Edorion
frowned at his cards. “Out in the countryside, though . . . . I
hear that some of the High Lords, a few, have been trying to
raise an army to take back the Stone.” Suddenly no one was
looking at Mat, though Estean still seemed to be trying to
make out his cards. “When the Lord Dragon takes us to war,
of course, it will all melt away. In any case, we are loyal, here
in the Stone. The High Lords, too, I am certain. It is only the
few out in the countryside.”
Their loyalty would not outlast their fear of the Dragon
Reborn. For a moment Mat felt as though he were planning to
abandon Rand in a pit of vipers. Then he remembered what
Rand was. It was more like abandoning a weasel in a henyard.
Rand had been a friend. The Dragon Reborn, though . . . .
Who could be a friend to the Dragon Reborn? I’m not
abandoning anybody. He could probably pull the Stone
down on their heads, if he wanted to. On my head, too.
He told himself again that it was time to be gone.
“No fishermen’s daughters,” Estean mumbled. “You will speak
to the Lord Dragon?”
“It is your turn, Mat,” Carlomin said anxiously. He looked half
afraid, though what he feared—that Estean would anger Mat
again, or that the talk might go back to loyalty—was impossible
to say. “Will you buy the fifth card, or stack?”
Mat realized he had not been paying attention. Everyone but
himself and Carlomin had five cards, though Reimon had neatly
stacked his facedown beside the pot to show that he was out.
Mat hesitated, pretending to think, then sighed and tossed
another coin toward the pile.
As the silver crown bounced end over end, he suddenly felt
luck grow from trickles to a flood. Every ping of silver against
wooden tabletop rang clear in his head; he could have called
face or sigil and known how the coin would land on any
bounce. Just as he knew what his next card would be before
Carlomin laid it in front of him.
Sliding his cards together on the table, he fanned them in
one hand. The Ruler of Flames stared at him alongside the
other four, the Amyrlin Seat balancing a flame on her palm,
though she looked nothing like Siuan Sanche. However the
Tairens felt about Aes Sedai, they acknowledged the power of
Tar Valon, even if Flames was the lowest suit.
What were the odds of being dealt all five? His luck was best
with random things, like dice, but perhaps a little more was
beginning to rub off on cards. “The Light burn my bones to
ash if it is not so,” he muttered. Or that was what he meant
to say.
“There,” Estean all but shouted. “You cannot deny it this
time. That was the Old Tongue. Something about burning, and
bones.” He grinned around the table. “My tutor would be
proud. I ought to send him a gift. If I can find out where he
went.”
Nobles were supposed to be able to speak the Old Tongue,
though in reality few knew more than Estean seemed to. The
young lords set to arguing over exactly what Mat had said.
They seemed to think it had been a comment on the heat.
Goose bumps pebbled Mat’s skin as he tried to recall the
words that had just come out of his mouth. A string of
gibberish, yet it almost seemed he should understand. Burn
Moiraine! If she’d left me alone, I wouldn’t have holes in
my memory big enough for a wagon and team, and I
wouldn’t be spouting . . . whatever it bloody is! He would
also be milking his father’s cows instead of walking the world
with a pocketful of gold, but he managed to ignore that part of
it.
“Are you here to gamble,” he said harshly, “or babble like old
women over their knitting!”
“To gamble,” Baran said curtly. “Three crowns, gold!” He
tossed the coins onto the pot.
“And three more besides.” Estean hiccoughed and added six
golden crowns to the pile.
Suppressing a grin, Mat forgot about the Old Tongue. It was
easy enough; he did not want to think about it. Besides, if
they were starting this strongly, he might win enough on this
hand to leave in the morning. And if he’s crazy enough to
start a war, I’ll leave if I have to walk.
Outside in the darkness, a cock crowed. Mat shifted uneasily
and told himself not to be foolish. No one was going to die.
His eyes dropped to his cards—and blinked. The Amyrlin’s
flame had been replaced by a knife. While he was telling
himself he was tired and seeing things, she plunged the tiny
blade into the back of his hand.
With a hoarse yell, he flung the cards away and hurled
himself backward, overturning his chair, kicking the table with
both feet as he fell. The air seemed to thicken like honey.
Everything moved as if time had slowed, but at the same time
everything seemed to happen at once. Other cries echoed his,
hollow shouts reverberating inside a cavern. He and the chair
drifted back and down; the table floated upward.
The Ruler of Flames hung in the air, growing larger, staring
at him with a cruel smile. Now close to life-size, she started to
step out of the card; she was still a painted shape, with no
depth, but she reached for him with her blade, red with his
blood as if it had already been driven into his heart. Beside
her the Ruler of Cups began to grow, the Tairen High Lord
drawing his sword.
Mat floated, yet somehow he managed to reach the dagger in
his left sleeve and hurl it in the same motion, straight for the
Amyrlin’s heart. If this thing had a heart. The second knife
came into his left hand smoothly and left more smoothly. The
two blades drifted through the air like thistledown. He wanted
to scream, but that first yell of shock and outrage still filled his
mouth. The Ruler of Rods was expanding beside the first two
cards, the Queen of Andor gripping the rod like a bludgeon,
her red-gold hair framing a madwoman’s snarl.
He was still falling, still yelling that drawn-out yell. The
Amyrlin was free of her card, the High Lord striding out with
his sword. The flat shapes moved almost as slowly as he.
Almost. He had proof the steel in their hands could cut, and
no doubt the rod could crack a skull. His skull.
His thrown daggers moved as if sinking in jelly. He was sure
the cock had crowed for him. Whatever his father said, the
omen had been real. But he would not give up and die.
Somehow he had two more daggers out from under his coat,
one in either hand. Struggling to twist in midair, to get his feet
under him, he threw one knife at the golden-haired figure with
the bludgeon. The other he held on to as he tried to turn
himself, to land ready to face . . . .
The world lurched back into normal motion, and he landed
awkwardly on his side, hard enough to drive the wind out of
him. Desperately he struggled to his feet, drawing another knife
from under his coat. You could not carry too many, Thom
claimed. Neither was needed.
For a moment he thought cards and figures had vanished.
Or maybe he had imagined it all. Maybe he was the one going
mad. Then he saw the cards, back to ordinary size, pinned to
one of the dark wood panels by his still quivering knives. He
took a deep, ragged breath.
The table lay on its side, coins still spinning across the floor
where lordlings and servants crouched among scattered cards.
They gaped at Mat and his knives, those in his hands and
those in the wall, with equally wide eyes. Estean snatched a
silver pitcher that had somehow escaped being overturned and
began pouring wine down his throat, the excess spilling over
his chin and down his chest.
“Just because you do not have the cards to win,” Edorion
said hoarsely, “there is no need to—” He cut off with a
shudder.
“You saw it, too.” Mat slipped the knives back into their
sheaths. A thin trickle of blood ran down the back of his hand
from the tiny wound. “Don’t pretend you went blind!”
“I saw nothing,” Reimon said woodenly. “Nothing!” He began
crawling across the floor, gathering up gold and silver,
concentrating on the coins as if they were the most important
thing in the world. The others were doing the same, except
Estean, who scrambled about checking the fallen pitchers for
any that still held wine. One of the servants had his face
hidden in his hands; the other, eyes closed, was apparently
praying in a low, breathless whine.
With a muttered oath, Mat strode to where his knives pinned
the three cards to the panel. They were only playing cards
again, just stiff paper with the clear lacquer cracked. But the
figure of the Amyrlin still held a dagger instead of a flame. He
tasted blood and realized he was sucking the cut in the back
of his hand.
Hastily he wrenched his knives free, tearing each card in half
before tucking the blade away. After a moment, he hunted
through the cards littering the floor until he found the rulers of
Coins and Winds, and tore them across, too. He felt a little
foolish—it was over and done with; the cards were just cards
again—but he could not help it.
None of the young lords crawling about on hands and knees
tried to stop him. They scrambled out of his way, not even
glancing at him. There would be no more gambling tonight,
and maybe not for some nights to come. At least, not with
him. Whatever had happened, it had been aimed at him,
clearly. Even more clearly, it had to have been done with the
One Power. They wanted no part of that.
“Burn you, Rand!” he muttered under his breath. “If you
have to go mad, leave me out of it!” His pipe lay in two
pieces, the stem bitten through cleanly. Angrily he grabbed his
purse from the floor and stalked out of the room.
 
 
In his darkened bedchamber Rand tossed uneasily on a bed
wide enough for five people. He was dreaming.
Through a shadowy forest Moiraine was prodding him with a
sharp stick toward where the Amyrlin Seat waited, sitting on a
stump with a rope halter for his neck in her hands. Dim
shapes moved half-seen through the trees, stalking, hunting
him; here a dagger blade flashed in the failing light, over there
he caught a glimpse of ropes ready for binding. Slender and
not as tall as his shoulder, Moiraine wore an expression he
had never seen on her face. Fear. Sweating, she prodded
harder, trying to hurry him to the Amyrlin’s halter. Darkfriends
and the Forsaken in the shadows, the White Tower’s leash
ahead and Moiraine behind. Dodging Moiraine’s stick, he fled.
“It is too late for that,” she called after him, but he had to
get back. Back.
Muttering, he thrashed on the bed, then was still, breathing
more easily for a moment.
He was in the Waterwood back home, sunlight slanting
through the trees to sparkle on the pond in front of him.
There was green moss on the rocks at this end of the pond,
and thirty paces away at the other end a small arc of
wildflowers. This was where, as a child, he had learned to
swim.
“You should have a swim now.”
He spun around with a start. Min stood there, grinning at
him in her boy’s coat and breeches, and next to her, Elayne,
with her red-golden curls, in a green silk gown fit for her
mother’s palace.
It was Min who had spoken, but Elayne added, “The water
looks inviting, Rand. No one will bother us here.”
“I don’t know,” he began slowly. Min cut him off by twining
her fingers behind his neck and pulling herself up on tiptoe to
kiss him.
She repeated Elayne’s words in a soft murmur. “No one will
bother us here.” She stepped back and doffed her coat, then
attacked the laces of her shirt.
Rand stared, the more so when he realized Elayne’s gown
was lying on the mossy ground. The Daughter-Heir was
bending, arms crossed, gathering up the hem of her shift.
“What are you doing?” he demanded in a strangled voice.
“Getting ready to go swimming with you,” Min replied.
Elayne flashed him a smile, and hoisted the shift over her
head.
He turned his back hastily, though half wanting not to. And
found himself staring at Egwene, her big, dark eyes looking
back at him sadly. Without a word she turned and vanished
into the trees.
“Wait!” he shouted after her. “I can explain.”
He began to run; he had to find her. But as he reached the
edge of trees, Min’s voice stopped him.
“Don’t go, Rand.”
She and Elayne were in the water already, only their heads
showing as they swam lazily in the middle of the pond.
“Come back,” Elayne called, lifting a slim arm to beckon. “Do
you not deserve what you want for a change?”
He shifted his feet, wanting to move but unable to decide
which way. What he wanted. The words sounded strange.
What did he want? He raised a hand to his face, to wipe
away what felt like sweat. Festering flesh almost obliterated the
heron branded on his palm; white bone showed through
red-edged gaps.
With a jerk, he came awake, lying there shivering in the dark
heat. Sweat soaked his smallclothes, and the linen sheets
beneath his back. His side burned, where an old wound had
never healed properly. He traced the rough scar, a circle
nearly an inch across, still tender after all this time. Even
Moiraine’s Aes Sedai Healing could not mend it completely. But
I’m not rotting yet. And I’m not mad, either. Not yet
. Not
yet. That said it all. He wanted to laugh, and wondered if that
meant he was a little mad already.
Dreaming about Min and Elayne, dreaming of them like that .
. . . Well, it was not madness, but it was surely foolishness.
Neither one of them had ever looked at him in that way when
he was awake. Egwene he had been all but promised to since
they were both children. The betrothal words had never been
spoken in front of the Women’s Circle, but everyone in and
around Emond’s Field knew they would marry one day.
That one day would never come, of course; not now, not
with the fate that lay ahead of a man who channeled. Egwene
must have realized that, too. She must have. She was all
wrapped up in becoming Aes Sedai. Still, women were odd;
she might think she could be an Aes Sedai and marry him
anyway, channeling or no channeling. How could he tell her
that he did not want to marry her anymore, that he loved her
like a sister? But there would not be any need to tell her, he
was sure. He could hide behind what he was. She had to
understand that. What man could ask a woman to marry him
when he knew he had only a few years, if he was lucky,
before he went insane, before he began to rot alive? He
shivered despite the heat.
I need sleep. The High Lords would be back in the
morning, maneuvering for his favor. For the Dragon Reborn’s
favor. Maybe I won’t dream, this time
. He started to roll
over, searching for a dry place on the sheets—and froze,
listening to small rustlings in the darkness. He was not alone.
The Sword That Is Not a Sword lay across the room,
beyond his reach, on a thronelike stand the High Lords had
given him, no doubt in the hopes he would keep Callandor
out of their sight. Someone wanting to steal Callandor. A
second thought came. Or to kill the Dragon Reborn. He did
not need Thom’s whispered warnings to know that the High
Lord’s professions of undying loyalty were only words of
necessity.
He emptied himself of thought and emotions, assuming the
Void; that much came without effort. Floating in the cold
emptiness within himself, thought and emotion outside, he
reached for the True Source. This time he touched it easily,
which was not always the case.
Saidin filled him like a torrent of white heat and light,
exalting him with life, sickening him with the foulness of the
Dark One’s taint, like a skim of sewage floating on pure, sweet
water. The torrent threatened to wash him away, burn him up,
engulf him.
Fighting the flood, he mastered it by bare effort of will and
rolled from the bed, channeling the Power as he landed on his
feet in the stance to begin the sword-form called Apple
Blossoms in the Wind. His enemies could not be many or they
would have made more noise; the gently named form was
meant for use against more than one opponent.
As his feet hit the carpet, a sword was in his hands, with a
long hilt and a slightly curved blade sharp on only one edge.
It looked to have been wrought from flame yet it did not feel
even warm. The figure of a heron stood black against the
yellow-red of the blade. In the same instant every candle and
gilded lamp burst alight, small mirrors behind them swelling the
illumination. Larger mirrors on the walls and two stand-mirrors
reflected it further, until he could have read comfortably
anywhere in the large room.
Callandor sat undisturbed, a sword seemingly of glass, hilt
and blade, on a stand as tall as a man and just as wide, the
wood ornately carved and gilded and set with precious stones.
The furnishings, too, were all gilded and begemmed, bed and
chairs and benches, wardrobes and chests and washstand. The
pitcher and bowl were golden Sea Folk porcelain, as thin as
leaves. The broad Tarabon carpet, in scrolls of scarlet and gold
and blue, could have fed an entire village for months. Almost
every flat surface held more delicate Sea Folk porcelain, or else
goblets and bowls and ornaments of gold worked with silver,
and silver chased with gold. On the broad marble mantel over
the fireplace, two silver wolves with ruby eyes tried to pull
down a golden stag a good three feet tall. Draperies of scarlet
silk embroidered with eagles in thread-of-gold hung at the
narrow windows, stirring slightly in a failing wind. Books lay
wherever there was room, leather-bound, wood-bound, some
tattered and still dusty from the deepest shelves of the Stone’s
library.
Now, where he had thought to see assassins, or thieves, one
beautiful young woman stood hesitant and surprised in the
middle of the carpet, black hair falling in shining waves to her
shoulders. Her thin, white silk robe emphasized more than it
hid. Berelain, ruler of the city-state of Mayene, was the last
person he had expected.
After one wide-eyed start, she made a deep, graceful curtsy
that drew her garments tight. “I am unarmed, my Lord
Dragon. I submit myself to your search, if you doubt me.” Her
smile suddenly made him uncomfortably aware that he wore
nothing but his smallclothes.
I’ll be burned if she makes me scramble around trying to
cover myself. The thought floated beyond the Void. I didn’t
ask her to walk in on me. To sneak in! Anger and
embarrassment drifted along the borders of emptiness too, but
his face reddened all the same; dimly he was aware of it,
aware of the knowledge deepening the flush in his cheeks. So
coldly calm within the Void; outside . . . . He could feel each
individual droplet of sweat sliding down his chest and back. It
took a real effort of stubborn will to stand there under her
eyes. Search her? The Light help me!
Relaxing his stance, he let the sword vanish but held the
narrow flow connecting him to saidin. It was like drinking
from a hole in a dike when the whole long mound of earth
wanted to give way, the water sweet as honeyed wine and
sickening as a rivulet through a midden.
He did not know much of this woman, except that she
walked through the Stone as if it were her palace in Mayene.
Thom said the First of Mayene asked questions constantly, of
everyone. Questions about Rand. Which might have been
natural, given what he was, but they made him no easier in
his mind. And she had not returned to Mayene. That was not
natural. She had been held captive in all but name for months,
until his arrival, cut off from her throne and the ruling of her
small nation. Most people would have taken the first
opportunity to get away from a man who could channel.
“What are you doing here?” He knew he sounded harsh,
and did not care. “There were Aiel guarding that door when I
went to sleep. How did you come past them?”
Berelain’s lips curved up a trifle more; to Rand it seemed the
room had gotten suddenly even hotter. “They passed me
through immediately, when I said I had been summoned by
the Lord Dragon.”
“Summoned? I didn’t summon anybody.” Stop this
, he told
himself. She’s a queen, or the next thing to it. You know as
much about the ways of queens as you do about flying
. He
tried to make himself be civil, only he did not know what to
call the First of Mayene. “My Lady . . .” That would have to
do. “ . . . why would I summon you at this time of night?”
She gave a low, rich laugh, deep in her throat; even wrapped
in emotionless emptiness it seemed to tickle his skin, make the
hairs stir on his arms and legs. Suddenly he took in her
clinging garb as if for the first time, and felt himself go red all
over again. She can’t mean . . . . Can she? Light, I’ve never
said two words to her before.
“Perhaps I wish to talk, my Lord Dragon.” She let the pale
robe fall to the floor, revealing an even thinner white silk
garment he could only call a nightgown. It left her smooth
shoulders completely bare, and exposed a considerable expanse
of pale bosom. He found himself wondering distantly what held
it up. It was difficult not to stare. “You are a long way from
your home, like me. The nights especially seem lonely.”
“Tomorrow, I will be happy to talk with you.”
“But during the day, people surround you. Petitioners. High
Lords. Aiel.” She gave a shiver; he told himself he really ought
to look away, but he could as easily have stopped breathing.
He had never before been so aware of his own reactions
when wrapped in the Void. “The Aiel frighten me, and I do
not like Tairen lords of any sort.”
About the Tairens he could believe her, but he did not think
anything frightened this woman. Burn me, she’s in a strange
man’s bedchamber in the middle of the night, only
half-dressed, and I’m the one who’s jumpy as a cat in a
dog run, Void or no. It was time to put an end to things
before they went too far.
“It would be better if you return to your own bedchamber,
my Lady.” Part of him wanted to tell her to put on a cloak,
too. A thick cloak. Part of him did. “It . . . it is really too late
for talking. Tomorrow. In daylight.”
She gave him a slanted, quizzical look. “Have you absorbed
stuffy Tairen ways already, my Lord Dragon? Or is this
reticence something from your Two Rivers? We are not so . .
. formal . . . in Mayene.”
“My Lady . . . .” He tried to sound formal; if she did not
like formality, that was what he wanted. “I am promised to
Egwene al’Vere, my Lady.”
“You mean the Aes Sedai, my Lord Dragon? If she really is
Aes Sedai. She is quite young—perhaps too young—to wear the
ring and the shawl.” Berelain spoke as if Egwene were a child,
though she herself could not be more than a year older than
Rand, if that, and he had only a little over two years on
Egwene. “My Lord Dragon, I do not mean to come between
you. Marry her, if she is Green Ajah. I would never aspire to
wed the Dragon Reborn himself. Forgive me if I overstep
myself, but I told you we are not so . . . formal in Mayene.
May I call you Rand?”
Rand surprised himself by sighing regretfully. There had been
a glint in her eye, a slight shift of expression, gone quickly,
when she mentioned marrying the Dragon Reborn. If she had
not considered it before, she had now. The Dragon Reborn,
not Rand al’Thor; the man of prophecy, not the shepherd
from the Two Rivers. He was not shocked, exactly; some girls
back home mooned over whoever proved himself fastest or
strongest in the games at Bel Tine and Sunday, and now and
again a woman set her eyes on the man with the richest fields
or the largest flocks. It would have been good to think she
wanted Rand al’Thor. “It is time for you to go, my Lady,” he
said quietly.
She stepped closer. “I can feel your eyes on me, Rand.” Her
voice was smoky heat. “I am no village girl tied to her
mother’s apron, and I know you want—”
“Do you think I’m made of stone, woman?” She jumped at
his roar, but the next instant she was crossing the carpet,
reaching for him, her eyes dark pools that could pull a man
into their depths.
“Your arms look as strong as stone. If you think you must
be harsh with me, then be harsh, so long as you hold me.”
Her hands touched his face; sparks seemed to leap from her
fingers.
Without thinking he channeled the flows still linked to him,
and suddenly she was staggering back, eyes wide with
startlement, as if a wall of air pushed her. It was air, he
realized; he did things without knowing what he was doing
more often than he did know. At least, once done, he could
usually remember how to do them again.
The unseen, moving wall scraped ripples along the carpet,
sweeping along Berelain’s discarded robe, a boot he had tossed
aside undressing, and a red leather footstool supporting an
open volume of Eban Vandes’s The History of the Stone of
Tear, pushing them along as it forced her almost to the wall,
fenced her in. Safely away from him. He tied off the flow—that
was all he could think to call what he did—and no longer
needed to maintain the shield himself. For a moment he
studied what he had done, until he was sure he could repeat
it. It looked useful, especially the tying off.
Dark eyes still wide, Berelain felt along the confines of her
invisible prison with trembling hands. Her face was almost as
white as her skimpy silk shift. Footstool, boot and book lay at
her feet, jumbled with the robe.
“Much as I regret it,” he told her, “we will not speak again,
except in public, my Lady.” He really did regret it. Whatever
her motives, she was beautiful. Burn me, I am a fool! He
was not sure how he meant that—for thinking of her beauty,
or for sending her away. “In fact, it is best you arrange your
journey back to Mayene as soon as possible. I promise you
that Tear will not trouble Mayene again. You have my word.”
It was a promise good only for his lifetime, perhaps only as
long as he stood in the Stone, but he had to offer her
something. A bandage for wounded pride, a gift to take her
mind off being afraid.
But her fear was already under control, on the outside, at
least. Honesty and openness filled her face, all efforts at allure
gone. “Forgive me. I have handled this badly. I did not mean
to offend. In my country, a woman may speak her mind to a
man freely, or he to her. Rand, you must know that you are
a handsome man, tall and strong. I would be the one made of
stone, if I did not see it, and admire. Please do not send me
away from you. I will beg it, if you wish.” She knelt smoothly,
like a dance. Her expression still said she was being open,
confessing everything, but on the other hand, in kneeling she
had managed to tug her already precarious gown down until it
looked in real danger of falling off. “Please, Rand?”
Even sheltered in emptiness as he was, he gaped at her, and
it had nothing to do with her beauty or her near undress.
Well, only partly. If the Defenders of the Stone had been half
as determined as this woman, half as steadfast in purpose, ten
thousand Aiel could never have taken the Stone.
“I am flattered, my Lady,” he said diplomatically. “Believe me,
I am. But it would not be fair to you. I cannot give you what
you deserve.” And let her make of that what she will
.
Outside in the darkness, a cock crowed.
To Rand’s surprise, Berelain suddenly stared past him, eyes
as big as teacups. Her mouth dropped open, and her slim
throat corded with a scream that would not come. He spun,
the yellow-red sword flashing back into his hands.
Across the room, one of the stand-mirrors threw his reflection
back at him, a tall young man with reddish hair and gray
eyes, wearing only white linen smallclothes and holding a sword
carved from fire. The reflection stepped out onto the carpet,
raising its sword.
I have gone mad. Thought drifted on the borders of the
Void. No! She saw it. It’s real!
Movement to his left caught the corner of his eye. He twisted
before he could think, sword sweeping up in The Moon Rises
Over Water. The blade slashed through the shape—his
shape—climbing out of a mirror on the wall. The form wavered,
broke up like dust motes floating on air, vanished. Rand’s
reflection appeared in the mirror again, but even as it did, it
put hands on the mirror frame. He was aware of movement
in mirrors all around the room.
Desperately, he stabbed at the mirror. Silvered glass shattered,
yet it seemed that the image shattered first. He thought he
heard a distant scream inside his head, his own voice
screaming, fading. Even as shards of mirror fell, he lashed out
with the One Power. Every mirror in the room exploded
silently, fountaining glass across the carpet. The dying scream in
his head echoed again and again, sending shivers down his
back. It was his voice; he could hardly believe it was not
himself who made the sounds.
He spun back to face the one that had gotten out, just in
time to meet its attack, Unfolding the Fan to counter Stones
Falling Down the Mountain. The figure leaped back, and
suddenly Rand realized it was not alone. As quickly as he had
smashed the mirrors, two more reflections had escaped. Now
they stood facing him, three duplicates of himself down to the
puckered round scar on his side, all staring at him, faces
twisted with hatred and contempt, with a strange hunger. Only
their eyes seemed empty, lifeless. Before he could take a
breath, they rushed at him.
Rand stepped sideways, pieces of broken mirror slicing his
feet, ever sideways, from stance to stance and form to form,
trying to face only one at a time. He used everything Lan,
Moiraine’s Warder, had taught him of the sword in their daily
practice.
Had the three fought together, had they supported one
another, he would have died in the first minute, but each
fought him alone, as if the others did not exist. Even so, he
could not stop their blades entirely; in minutes blood ran down
the side of his face, his chest, his arms. The old wound tore
open, adding its flow to stain his smallclothes with red. They
had his skill as well as his face, and they were three to his
one. Chairs and tables toppled; priceless Sea Folk porcelain
shattered on the carpet.
He felt his strength ebbing. None of his cuts was major by
itself, except the old wound, but all together . . . . He never
thought of calling for help from the Aiel outside his door. The
thick walls would stifle even a death scream. Whatever was
done, he must do alone. He fought wrapped in the cold
emotionlessness of the Void, but fear scraped at its boundaries
like wind-lashed branches scratching a window in the night.
His blade slipped past its opponent to slash across a face just
below the eyes—he could not help wincing; it was his face—its
owner sliding back just far enough to avoid a killing cut. Blood
welled from the gash, veiling mouth and chin in dark crimson,
but the ruined face did not change expression, and its empty
eyes never flickered. It wanted him dead the way a starving
man wanted food.
Can anything kill them? All three bled from the wounds he
had managed to inflict, but bleeding did not seem to slow
them as he knew it was slowing him. They tried to avoid his
sword, but did not appear to realize they had been hurt. If
they have been, he thought grimly. Light, if they bleed, they
can be hurt! They must!
He needed a respite, a moment to catch his breath, to gather
himself. Suddenly he leaped away from them, onto the bed,
rolling across its width. He sensed rather than saw blades
slashing the sheets, barely missing his flesh. Staggering, he
landed on his feet, caught at a small table to steady himself.
The shining, gold-worked silver bowl on the table wobbled. One
of his doubles had climbed onto the torn bed, kicking goose
feathers as it padded across warily, sword at the ready. The
other two came slowly around, still ignoring each other, intent
only on him. Their eyes glistened like glass.
Rand shuddered as pain stabbed his hand on the table. An
image of himself, no more than six inches tall, drew back its
small sword. Instinctively, he grabbed the figure before it could
stab again. It writhed in his grip, baring teeth at him. He
became aware of small movements all around the room, of
small reflections by the score stepping out of polished silver.
His hand began to numb, to grow cold, as if the thing were
sucking the warmth out of his flesh. The heat of saidin swelled
inside him; a rushing filled his head, and the heat flowed into
his icy hand.
Suddenly the small figure burst like a bubble, and he felt
something flow into him—from the bursting—some little portion
of his lost strength. He jerked as tiny jolts of vitality seemed to
pelt him.
When he raised his head—wondering why he was not
dead—the small reflections he had half-glimpsed were gone. The
three larger stood wavering, as if his gain in strength had been
their loss. Yet as he looked up, they steadied on their feet and
came on, if more cautiously.
He backed away, thinking furiously, sword threatening first
one and then another. If he continued to fight them as he had
been, they would kill him sooner or later. He knew that as
surely as he knew he was bleeding. But something linked the
reflections. Absorbing the small one—the far-off thought made
him queasy, but that was what it had been—had not only
brought the others with it, it had also affected the bigger, for a
moment at least. If he could do the same to one of them, it
might destroy all three.
Even thinking of absorbing them made him vaguely aware of
wanting to empty his stomach, but he did not know another
way. I don’t know this way. How did I do it? Light, what
did I do? He had to grapple with one of them, to touch it at
least; he was somehow sure of that. But if he tried to get that
close, he would have three blades through him in as many
heartbeats. Reflections. How much are they still reflections?
Hoping he was not being a fool—if he was, he might well be
a dead one—he let his sword vanish. He was ready to bring it
back on the instant, but when his carved-fire blade winked out
of existence, the others’ did, too. For a moment, confusion
painted three copies of his face, one a bloody ruin. But before
he could seize one of them, they leaped for him, all four
crashing to the floor in a tangle of grappling limbs, rolling
across the glass-littered carpet.
Cold soaked into Rand. Numbness crept along his limbs,
through his bones, until he barely felt the shards of mirror, the
slivers of porcelain grinding into his flesh. Something close to
panic flickered across the emptiness surrounding him. He might
have made a fatal mistake. They were larger than the one he
had absorbed, and they were drawing more heat from him.
And not only heat. As he grew colder, the glassy gray eyes
staring into his took on life. With chill certainty he knew that if
he died, that would not end the struggle. The three would turn
on one another until only one remained, and that one would
have his life, his memories, would be him.
Stubbornly he fought, struggling harder the weaker he
became. He pulled on saidin, trying to fill himself with its
heat. Even the stomach-turning taint was welcome, for the
more of it he felt, the more saidin suffused him. If his
stomach could rebel, then he was still alive, and if he lived, he
could fight. But how? How? What did I do before? Saidin
raged through him till it seemed that if he survived his
attackers, he would only be consumed by the Power. How did
I do it? All he could do was pull at saidin, and try . . .
reach . . . strain . . . .
One of the three vanished—Rand felt it slide into him; it was
as if he had fallen from a height, flat onto stony ground—and
then the other two together. The impact flung him onto his
back, where he lay staring up at the worked plaster ceiling
with its gilded bosses, lay luxuriating in the fact that he was
still breathing.
The Power still swelled in every crevice of his being. He
wanted to spew up every meal he had ever eaten. He felt so
alive that, by comparison, life not soaked in saidin was living a
shadow. He could smell the beeswax of the candles, and the oil
in the lamps. He could feel every fiber of the carpet against his
back. He could feel every gash in his flesh, every cut, every
nick, every bruise. But he held on to saidin.
One of the Forsaken had tried to kill him. Or all of them
had. It must have been that, unless the Dark One was free
already, in which case he did not think he would have faced
anything as easy or as simple as this. So he held his link to
the True Source. Unless I did it myself. Can I hate what I
am enough to try to kill myself? Without even knowing it?
Light, I have to learn to control it. I have to!
Painfully, he pushed himself up. Leaving bloody footprints on
the carpet, he limped to the stand where Callandor rested.
Blood from hundreds of cuts covered him. He lifted the sword,
and its glassy length glowed with the Power flowing into it. The
Sword That Is Not a Sword. That blade, apparently glass,
would cut as well as the finest steel, yet Callandor truly was
not a sword, but instead a remnant of the Age of Legends, a
sa’angreal
. With the aid of one of the relatively few angreal
known to have survived the War of the Shadow and Breaking
of the World, it was possible to channel flows of the One
Power that would have burned the channeler to ash without it.
With one of the even rarer sa’angreal, the flows could be
increased as much over those possible with an angreal as an
angreal increased them over channeling naked. And Callandor
, usable only by a man, linked to the Dragon Reborn through
three thousand years of legend and prophecy, was one of the
most powerful sa’angreal ever made. Holding Callandor in his
hands, he could level a city’s walls at a blow. Holding
Callandor in his hands, he could face even one of the
Forsaken. It was them. It must have been.
Abruptly he realized he had not heard a sound from
Berelain. Half fearing to see her dead, he turned.
Still kneeling, she flinched. She had donned her robe again,
and hugged it around her like steel armor, or stone walls. Face
as white as snow, she licked her lips. “Which one are . . . ?”
She swallowed and began again. “Which one . . . ?” She could
not finish it.
“I am the only one there is,” he said gently. “The one you
were treating as if we were betrothed.” He meant it to soothe
her, perhaps make her smile—surely a woman as strong as
she had shown herself to be could smile, even facing a
blood-drenched man—but she bent forward, pressing her face
to the floor.
“I apologize humbly for having most grievously offended you,
Lord Dragon.” Her breathy voice did sound humble, and
frightened. Completely unlike herself. “I beg you to forget my
offense, and forgive. I will not bother you again. I swear it, my
Lord Dragon. On my mother’s name and under the Light, I
swear it.”
He loosed the knotted flow; the invisible wall confining her
became a momentary stir that ruffled her robe. “There is
nothing to forgive,” he said wearily. He felt very tired. “Go as
you wish.”
She straightened hesitantly, stretched out a hand, and gave a
relieved gasp when it encountered nothing. Gathering the skirts
of her robe, she began to pick her way across the glass-littered
carpet, shards grating under her velvet slippers. Short of the
door, she stopped, facing him with an obvious effort. Her eyes
could not quite meet his. “I will send the Aiel in to you, if you
wish. I could send for one of the Aes Sedai to tend your
wounds.”
She would as soon be in a room with a Myrddraal, now,
or the Dark One himself, but she’s no milksop. “Thank you,”
he said quietly, “but no. I would appreciate it if you told no
one what happened here. Not yet. I will do what needs to be
done.” It had to be the Forsaken.
“As my Lord Dragon commands.” She gave him a tight
curtsy and hurried out, perhaps afraid he might change his
mind about letting her go.
“As soon the Dark One himself,” he murmured as the door
closed behind her.
Limping to the foot of the bed, he lowered himself into the
chest there and laid Callandor across his knees, bloody hands
resting on the glowing blade. With that in his hands, even one
of the Forsaken would fear him. In a moment he would send
for Moiraine to Heal his wounds. In a moment he would speak
to the Aiel outside, and become the Dragon Reborn again. But
for now, he only wanted to sit, and remember a shepherd
named Rand al’Thor.

Despite the hour, a good many people were hurrying through
the Stone’s wide corridors, a steady trickle of men and women
in the black and gold of Stone servants or the livery of one
High Lord or another. Now and again a Defender or two
appeared, bareheaded and unarmed, some with their coats
undone. The servants bowed or curtsied to Perrin and Faile if
they came close, then hurried on with hardly a pause. Most of
the soldiers gave a start on seeing them. Some bowed stiffly,
hand to heart, but one and all quickened their steps as if
eager to be away.
Only one lamp in three or four was lit. In the dim stretches
between their tall stands, shadows blurred the hanging
tapestries and obscured the occasional chest against the wall.
For any eyes but Perrin’s, they did. His eyes glowed like
burnished gold in those murky lengths of hall. He walked
quickly from lamp to lamp and kept his gaze down unless he
was in full light. Most people in the Stone knew about his
strangely colored eyes, one way or another. None of them
mentioned it, of course. Even Faile seemed to assume the color
was part of his association with an Aes Sedai, something that
simply was, to be accepted but never explained. Even so, a
prickling always ran across his back whenever he realized that
a stranger had seen his eyes shining in the dark. When they
held their tongues, the silence only emphasized his apartness.
“I wish they wouldn’t look at me like that,” he muttered as a
grizzled Defender twice his age came close to running once he
had passed. “As though they are afraid of me. They haven’t
before; not this way. Why aren’t all these people in bed?” A
woman carrying a mop and a bucket bobbed a curtsy and
scurried by with her head down.
Her arm twined through his, Faile glanced at him. “I would
say the guards are not supposed to be in this part of the
Stone unless they are on duty. A good time to cuddle a maid
on a lord’s chair, and maybe pretend they are the lord and
lady, while lord and lady are asleep. They are probably worried
that you might report them. And servants do most of their
work at night. Who would want them underfoot, sweeping and
dusting and polishing, in daylight?”
Perrin nodded doubtfully. He supposed she would know
about such things from her father’s house. A successful
merchant likely had servants, and guards for his wagons. At
least these folk were not out of their beds because what had
happened to him had happened to them, too. If that were the
case, they would be out of the Stone altogether, and likely still
running. But why had he been a target, singled out, as it
seemed? He was not looking forward to confronting Rand, but
he had to know. Faile had to stretch her stride to keep up
with him.
For all its splendor, all the gold and fine carving and inlays,
the interior of the Stone had been designed for war as much
as its exterior had been. Murderholes dotted the ceiling
wherever corridors crossed. Never-used arrowslits peeked into
the halls at places where they might cover an entire hallway.
He and Faile climbed narrow, curving staircase after narrow,
curving staircase, all built into the walls or else enclosed, with
more arrowslits looking down on the corridor below. None of
this design had hampered the Aiel, of course, the first enemy
ever to get beyond the outer wall.
As they trotted up one of the winding stairs—Perrin did not
realize they were trotting, though he would have been moving
faster if not for Faile on his arm—he caught a whiff of old
sweat and a hint of sickly-sweet perfume, but they registered
only in the back of his brain. He was caught up in what he
was going to say to Rand. Why did you try to kill me? Are
you going mad already? There was no easy way to ask, and
he did not expect easy answers.
Stepping out into a shadowed corridor nearly at the top of
the Stone, he found himself staring at the backs of a High
Lord and two of the nobleman’s personal guards. Only the
Defenders were allowed to wear armor inside the Stone, but
these three had swords at their hips. That was not unusual, of
course, but their presence here, on this floor, in the shadows,
staring intently at the bright light at the far end of the hall,
that was not usual at all. That light came from the anteroom
in front of the chambers Rand had been given. Or taken. Or
maybe been pushed into by Moiraine.
Perrin and Faile had made no effort to be quiet in climbing
the stairs, but the three men were so intent in their watching
that none of them noticed the new arrivals at first. Then one
of the blue-coated bodyguards twisted his head as if working a
cramp in his neck; his mouth dropped open when he saw
them. Biting off an oath, the fellow whirled to face Perrin,
baring a good hand of his swordblade. The other was only a
heartbeat slower. Both stood tensed, ready, but their eyes
shifted uneasily, sliding off Perrin’s. They gave off a sour smell
of fear. So did the High Lord, though he had his fear tightly
reined.
The High Lord Torean, white streaking his dark, pointed
beard, moved languidly, as if at a ball. Pulling a too sweetly
scented handkerchief from his sleeve, he dabbed at a knobby
nose that appeared not at all large when compared with his
ears. A fine silk coat with red satin cuffs only exaggerated the
plainness of his face. He eyed Perrin’s shirtsleeves and dabbed
his nose again before inclining his head slightly. “The Light
illumine you,” he said politely. His glance touched Perrin’s
yellow stare and flinched away, though his expression did not
change. “You are well, I trust?” Perhaps too politely.
Perrin did not really care for the man’s tone, but the way
Torean looked Faile up and down, with a sort of casual
interest, clenched his fists. He managed to keep his voice level,
though. “The Light illumine you, High Lord Torean. I am glad
to see you helping keep watch over the Lord Dragon. Some
men in your place might resent him being here.”
Torean’s thin eyebrows twitched. “Prophecy has been fulfilled,
and Tear has fulfilled its place in that prophecy. Perhaps the
Dragon Reborn will lead Tear to a still greater destiny. What
man could resent that? But it is late. A good night to you.” He
eyed Faile again, pursing his lips, and walked off down the hall
just a bit too briskly, away from the anteroom’s lights. His
bodyguards heeled him like well-trained dogs.
“There was no need for you to be uncivil,” Faile said in a
tight voice when the High Lord was out of hearing. “You
sounded as if your tongue were frozen iron. If you do intend
to remain here, you had better learn to get on with the lords.”
“He was looking at you as if he wanted to dandle you on
his knee. And I do not mean like a father.”
She sniffed dismissively. “He is not the first man ever to look
at me. If he found the nerve to try more, I could put him in
his place with a frown and a glance. I do not need you to
speak for me, Perrin Aybara.” Still, she did not sound entirely
displeased.
Scratching his beard, he peered after Torean, watching the
High Lord and his guards vanish around a distant corner. He
wondered how the Tairen lords managed without sweating to
death. “Did you notice, Faile? His heel-hounds did not take
their hands off their swords until he was ten paces clear of
us.”
She frowned at him, then down the hall after the three, and
nodded slowly. “You’re right. But I do not understand. They do
not bow and scrape the way they do for him, but everyone
walks as warily around you and Mat as they do around the
Aes Sedai.”
“Maybe being a friend of the Dragon Reborn isn’t as much
protection as it used to be.”
She did not suggest leaving again, not in words, but her eyes
were full of it. He was more successful in ignoring the
unspoken suggestion than he had been with the spoken.
Before they reached the end of the hallway, Berelain came
hurrying out of the bright lights of the anteroom, clutching a
thin white robe tightly around her with both arms. If the First
of Mayene had been walking any faster, she would have been
running.
To show Faile he could be as civil as she could possibly wish,
Perrin swept a bow that he wagered even Mat could not have
bettered. By contrast, Faile’s curtsy was the barest nod of her
head, the merest bending of a knee. He hardly noticed. As
Berelain rushed past them without a glance, the smell of fear,
rank and raw as a festering wound, made his nostrils twitch.
Beside this, Torean’s fear was nothing. This was mad panic tied
with a frayed rope. He straightened slowly, staring after her.
“Filling your eyes?” Faile asked softly.
Intent on Berelain, wondering what had driven her so near
the brink, he spoke without thinking. “She smelled of—”
Far down the corridor, Torean suddenly stepped out of a
side hallway to seize Berelain’s arm. He was talking a torrent,
but Perrin could not make out more than a handful of
scattered words, something about her overstepping herself in
her pride, and something else that seemed to be Torean
offering her his protection. Her reply was short, sharp, and
even more inaudible, delivered with lifted chin. Pulling herself
free roughly, the First of Mayene walked away, back straight
and seemingly more in command of herself. On the point of
following, Torean saw Perrin watching. Dabbing at his nose with
his handkerchief, the High Lord vanished back into the crossing
corridor.
“I do not care if she smelled of the Essence of Dawn,” Faile
said darkly. “That one is not interested in hunting a bear,
however fine his hide would look stretched on a wall. She
hunts the sun.”
He frowned at her. “The sun? A bear? What are you talking
about?”
“You go on by yourself. I think I will go to my bed after all.”
“If that’s what you want,” he said slowly, “but I thought you
were as eager to find out what happened as I am.”
“I think not. I’ll not pretend I am eager to meet the . . .
Rand . . . not after avoiding it until now. And now I am
especially not eager. No doubt the two of you will have a fine
talk without me. Especially if there’s wine.”
“You don’t make any sense,” he muttered, scrubbing a hand
through his hair. “If you want to go to bed, then fine, but I
wish you would say something I understand.”
For a long moment she studied his face, then suddenly bit
her lip. He thought she was trying not to laugh. “Oh, Perrin,
sometimes I believe it is your innocence I enjoy most of all.”
Sure enough, traces of laughter silvered her voice. “You go on
to . . . to your friend and tell me of it in the morning. As
much as you want to.” She pulled his head down to brush his
lips with a kiss and, as quick as the kiss, ran back down the
hallway.
Shaking his head, he watched until she turned in to the stairs
with no sign of Torean. Sometimes it was as if she spoke
another language. He headed toward the lights.
The anteroom was a round chamber fifty paces or more
across. A hundred gilded lamps hung on golden chains from
its high ceiling. Polished redstone columns made an inner ring,
and the floor appeared to be one huge slab of black marble,
streaked with gold. It had been the anteroom of the king’s
chambers, in the days when Tear had kings, before Artur
Hawkwing put everything from the Spine of the World to the
Aryth Ocean under one king. The Tairen kings had not
returned when Hawkwing’s empire collapsed, and for a
thousand years the only inhabitants of these apartments had
been mice tracking through dust. No High Lord had ever had
enough power to dare claim them for his own.
A ring of fifty Defenders stood rigidly in the middle of the
room, breastplates and rimmed helmets gleaming, spears all
slanted at exactly the same angle. Facing every direction as
they did, they were supposed to keep all intruders from the
current lord of the Stone. Their commander, a captain
distinguished by two short white plumes on his helmet, held
himself only a trifle less stiffly. He posed with one hand on his
sword hilt and the other on his hip, self-important with his
duty. They all smelled of fear and uncertainty, like men who
lived under a crumbling cliff and had almost managed to
convince themselves it would never fall. Or at least not tonight.
Not in the next hour.
Perrin walked on by them, his bootheels making echoes. The
officer started toward him, then hesitated when Perrin did not
stop to be challenged. He knew who Perrin was, of course; at
least, he knew as much as any Tairen knew. Traveling
companion of Aes Sedai, friend of the Lord Dragon. Not a
man to be interfered with by a mere officer of the Defenders
of the Stone. There was his apparent task of guarding the
Lord Dragon’s rest, of course, but though he probably did not
admit it even to himself, the officer had to know that he and
his brave show of polished armor were simply that. The real
guards were those Perrin met when he strode beyond the
columns and approached the doors to Rand’s chambers.
They had been sitting so still behind the columns that they
seemed to fade into the stone, though their coats and
breeches—in shades of gray and brown, made to hide them in
the Waste—stood out here as soon as they moved. Six
Maidens of the Spear, Aiel women who had chosen a warrior’s
life over the hearth, flowed between him and the doors on
soft, laced boots that reached their knees. They were tall for
women, the tallest barely a hand shorter than he,
sun-darkened, with short-cropped hair, yellow or red or
something in between. Two held curved horn bows with arrows
nocked, if not drawn. The others carried small hide bucklers
and three or four short spears each—short, but with
spearheads long enough to stick through a man’s body with
inches to spare.
“I do not think I can let you go in,” a woman with
flame-colored hair said, smiling slightly to take the sting out of
the words. Aiel did not go about grinning as much as other
folk, or show a great deal of any outward emotion for that
matter. “I think he does not want to see anyone tonight.”
“I am going in, Bain.” Ignoring her spears, he took her by
the upper arms. That was when it became impossible to ignore
the spears, since she had managed to get a spearpoint hard
against the side of his throat. For that matter, a somewhat
blonder woman named Chiad suddenly had one of her spears
at the other side, as if the two were intended to meet
somewhere in the middle of his neck. The other women only
watched, confident that Bain and Chiad could handle whatever
had to be done. Still, he did his best. “I don’t have time to
argue with you. Not that you listen to people who argue with
you, as I remember. I am going in.” As gently as he could, he
picked Bain up and set her out of his way.
Chiad’s spear only needed her to breathe on it to draw
blood, but after one startled widening of dark blue eyes, Bain
abruptly took hers away and grinned. “Would you like to learn
a game called Maidens’ Kiss, Perrin? You might play well, I
think. At the very least you would learn something.” One of
the others laughed aloud. Chiad’s spearpoint left his neck.
He took a deep breath, hoping they would not notice it was
his first since the spears touched him. They had not veiled
their faces—their shoufa lay coiled around their necks like dark
scarves—but he did not know if Aiel had to do so before they
killed, only that veiling meant they were ready to.
“Another time, perhaps,” he said politely. They were all
grinning as if Bain had said something amusing, and his not
understanding was part of the humor. Thom was right. A man
could go crazy trying to understand women, of any nation and
any station in life; that was what Thom said.
As he reached for a door handle in the shape of a rearing
golden lion, Bain added, “On your head be it. He has already
chased out what most men would consider better company by
far than you.”
Of course, he thought, pulling open the door, Berelain. She
was coming from here. Tonight, everything is revolving
around—
The First of Mayene vanished from his thoughts as he got a
look into the room. Broken mirrors hung on the walls and
broken glass covered the floor, along with shards of shattered
porcelain and feathers from the slashed mattress. Open books
lay tumbled among overturned chairs and benches. And Rand
was sitting at the foot of his bed, slumped against one of the
bedposts with eyes closed and hands limp atop Callandor,
which lay across his knees. He looked as if he had taken a
bath in blood.
“Get Moiraine!” Perrin snapped at the Aiel women. Was Rand
still alive? If he was, he needed Aes Sedai Healing to stay that
way. “Tell her to hurry!” He heard a gasp behind him, then
soft boots running.
Rand lifted his head. His face was a smeared mask. “Shut
the door.”
“Moiraine will be here soon, Rand. Rest easy. She will—”
“Shut the door, Perrin.”
Murmuring among themselves, the Aiel women frowned, but
moved back. Perrin pulled the door to, cutting off a questioning
shout from the white-plumed officer.
Glass crunched under his boots as he crossed the carpet to
Rand. Tearing a strip from a wildly sliced linen sheet, he
wadded it against the wound in Rand’s side. Rand’s hands
tightened on the transparent sword at the pressure, then
relaxed. Blood soaked through almost immediately. Cuts and
gashes covered him from the soles of his feet to his head;
slivers of glass glittered in many of them. Perrin rolled his
shoulders helplessly. He did not know what more to do, other
than wait for Moiraine.
“What under the Light did you try to do, Rand? You look as
though you tried to skin yourself. And you nearly killed me, as
well.” For a moment he thought Rand was not going to
answer.
“Not me,” Rand said finally, in a near whisper. “One of the
Forsaken.”
Perrin tried to relax muscles he did not remember tensing.
The effort was only partly successful. He had mentioned the
Forsaken to Faile, not exactly casually, but by and large he
had been trying not to think of what the Forsaken might do
when they found out where Rand was. If one of them could
bring down the Dragon Reborn, he or she would stand high
above the others when the Dark One broke free. The Dark
One free, and the Last Battle lost before it was fought.
“Are you sure?” he said, just as quietly.
“It had to be, Perrin. It had to be.”
“If one of them came after me as well as you . . . ?
Where’s Mat, Rand? If he was alive, and went through what I
did, he’d be thinking what I did. That it was you. He’d be
here by now to bless you out.”
“Or on a horse and halfway to the city gates.” Rand
struggled to sit erect. Drying blood smears cracked, and fresh
trickles started on his chest and shoulders. “If he is dead,
Perrin, you had best get as far from me as you can. I think
you and Loial are right about that.” He paused, studying
Perrin. “You and Mat must wish I had never been born. Or at
least that you’d never seen me.”
There was no point in going to check; if anything had
happened to Mat, it was over and done now. And he had a
feeling that his makeshift bandage pressed against Rand’s side
might be what would keep him alive long enough for Moiraine
to get there. “You don’t seem to care if he has gone off. Burn
me, he’s important, too. What are you going to do if he’s
gone? Or dead, the Light send it not so.”
“What they least expect.” Rand’s eyes looked like morning
mist covering the dawn, blue-gray with a feverish glow seeping
through. His voice had a knife edge. “That is what I have to
do in any case. What everyone least expects.”
Perrin took a slow breath. Rand had a right to taut nerves.
It was not a sign of incipient madness. He had to stop
watching for signs of madness. Those signs would come soon
enough, and watching would do nothing but keep his stomach
tied in knots. “What’s that?” he asked quietly.
Rand closed his eyes. “I only know I have to catch them by
surprise. Catch everyone by surprise,” he muttered fiercely.
One of the doors opened to admit a tall Aielman, his dark
red hair touched with gray. Behind him the Tairen officer’s
plumes bobbed as he argued with the Maidens; he was still
arguing when Bain pushed the door shut.
Rhuarc surveyed the room with sharp blue eyes, as if he
suspected enemies hiding behind a drape or an overturned
chair. The clan chief of the Taardad Aiel had no visible weapon
except the heavy-bladed knife at his waist, but he carried
authority and confidence like weapons, quietly, yet as surely as
if they were sheathed alongside the knife. And his shoufa hung
about his shoulders; no one who knew the slightest about Aiel
took one for less than dangerous when he wore the means to
veil his face.
“That Tairen fool outside sent word to his commander that
something had happened in here,” Rhuarc said, “and rumors
are already sprouting like corpse moss in a deep cave.
Everything from the White Tower trying to kill you to the Last
Battle fought here in this room.” Perrin opened his mouth;
Rhuarc raised a forestalling hand. “I happened to meet
Berelain, looking as if she had been told the day she would
die, and she told me the truth of it. And it does look to be
the truth, though I doubted her.”
“I sent for Moiraine,” Perrin said. Rhuarc nodded. Of course,
the Maidens would have told him everything they knew.
Rand gave a painful bark of a laugh. “I told her to keep
quiet. It seems the Lord Dragon doesn’t rule Mayene.” He
sounded more wryly amused than anything else.
“I have daughters older than that young woman,” Rhuarc
said. “I do not believe she will tell anyone else. I think she
would like to forget everything that happened tonight.”
“And I would like to know what happened,” Moiraine said,
gliding into the room. Slight and slender as she was, Rhuarc
towered over her as much as the man who followed her
in—Lan, her Warder—but it was the Aes Sedai who dominated
the room. She must have run to come so fast, but she was
calm as a frozen lake now. It took a great deal to ruffle
Moiraine’s serenity. Her blue silk gown had a high lace neck
and sleeves slashed with darker velvet, but the heat and
humidity did not appear to touch her. A small blue stone,
suspended on her forehead from a fine golden chain in her
dark hair, flashed in the light, emphasizing the absence of the
slightest sheen of sweat.
As always when they met, Lan’s and Rhuarc’s icy blue stares
nearly struck sparks. A braided leather cord held Lan’s dark
hair, gray-streaked at the temples. His face looked to have
been carved from rock, all hard planes and angles, and his
sword rode his hip like part of his body. Perrin was not sure
which of the two men was more deadly, but he thought a
mouse could starve on the difference.
The Warder’s eyes swung to Rand. “I thought you were old
enough to shave without someone to guide your hand.”
Rhuarc smiled, a slight smile but the first Perrin had ever
seen from him in Lan’s presence. “He is young yet. He will
learn.”
Lan glanced back at the Aielman, then returned the smile,
just as slightly.
Moiraine gave the two men a brief, withering look. She did
not seem to pick her way as she crossed the carpet, but she
stepped so lightly, holding her skirts up, that not one shard of
glass crunched under her slippers. Her eyes swept around the
room; taking in the smallest details, Perrin was sure. For a
moment she studied him—he did not meet her gaze; she knew
too much about him for comfort—but she bore down on Rand
like a silent, silken avalanche, icy and inexorable.
Perrin dropped his hand and moved out of her way. The
wadded cloth stayed against Rand’s side, held by congealing
blood. From head to foot the blood was beginning to dry in
black streaks and smears. The slivers of glass in his skin
glittered in the lamplight. Moiraine touched the blood-caked
cloth with her fingertips, then took her hand back as though
changing her mind about looking underneath. Perrin wondered
how the Aes Sedai could look at Rand without wincing, but her
smooth face did not change. She smelled faintly of rose-scented
soap.
“At least you are alive.” Her voice was musical, a chill, angry
music at the moment. “What happened can wait. Try to touch
the True Source.”
“Why?” Rand asked in a wary voice. “I cannot Heal myself,
even if I knew how to Heal. No one can. I know that much.”
For the space of a breath Moiraine seemed on the point of
an outburst, strange as that would have been, but in another
breath she was once again layered in calm so deep that surely
nothing could crack it. “Only some of the strength for Healing
comes from the Healer. The Power can replace what comes
from the Healed. Without it, you will spend tomorrow flat on
your back and perhaps the next day as well. Now, draw on
the Power, if you can, but do nothing with it. Simply hold it.
Use this, if you must.” She did not have to bend far to touch
Callandor.
Rand moved the sword from under her hand. “Simply hold
it, you say.” He sounded about to laugh out loud. “Very well.”
Nothing happened that Perrin could see, not that he expected
to. Rand sat there like the survivor of a lost battle, looking at
Moiraine. She hardly blinked. Twice she scrubbed her fingers
against her palms as if unaware.
After a time Rand sighed. “I cannot even reach the Void. I
can’t seem to concentrate.” A quick grin cracked the blood
drying on his face. “I do not understand why.” A thick red
thread snaked its way down past his left eye.
“Then I will do it as I always have,” Moiraine said, and took
Rand’s head in her hands, careless of the blood that ran over
her fingers.
Rand lurched to his feet with a roaring gasp, as if all the
breath were being squeezed from his lungs, back arching so
his head nearly tore free of her grasp. One arm flung wide,
fingers spread and bending back so far it seemed they must
break; the other hand clamped down on Callandor’s hilt, the
muscles of that arm knotting visibly into cramps. He shook like
cloth caught in a windstorm. Dark flakes of dried blood fell,
and bits of glass tinkled onto the chest and floor, forced out of
cuts closing up and knitting themselves together.
Perrin shivered as if that windstorm roared around him. He
had seen Healing done before, that and more, greater and
worse, but he could never be complacent about seeing the
Power used, about knowing it was being used, not even for
this. Tales of Aes Sedai, told by merchants’ guards and drivers,
had embedded themselves in his mind long years before he
met Moiraine. Rhuarc smelled sharply uneasy. Only Lan took it
as a matter of course. Lan and Moiraine.
Almost as soon as it began, it was done. Moiraine took her
hands away, and Rand slumped, catching the bedpost to hold
himself on his feet. It was difficult to say whether he clutched
the bedpost or Callandor more tenaciously. When Moiraine
tried to take the sword to replace it on the ornate stand
against the wall, he drew it away from her firmly, even
roughly.
Her mouth tightened momentarily, but she contented herself
with pulling the wad of cloth from his side, using it to scrub
away some of the surrounding smears. The old wound was a
tender scar again. The other injuries were simply gone. The
mostly dried blood that still covered him could have come from
someone else.
Moiraine frowned. “It still does not respond,” she murmured,
half to herself. “It will not heal completely.”
“That is the one that will kill me, isn’t it?” he asked her
softly, then quoted, “ ‘His blood on the rocks of Shayol Ghul,
washing away the Shadow, sacrifice for man’s salvation.’ ”
“You read too much,” she said sharply, “and understand too
little.”
“Do you understand more? If you do, then tell me.”
“He is only trying to find his way,” Lan said suddenly. “No
man likes to run forward blindly when he knows there is a
cliff somewhere ahead.”
Perrin gave a twitch of surprise. Lan almost never disagreed
with Moiraine, or at least not where anyone could overhear.
He and Rand had been spending a good deal of time together,
though, practicing the sword.
Moiraine’s dark eyes flashed, but what she said was “He
needs to be in bed. Will you ask that washwater be brought,
and another bedchamber prepared? This one needs a thorough
cleaning and a new mattress.” Lan nodded and put his head
into the anteroom for a moment, speaking quietly.
“I will sleep here, Moiraine.” Letting go of the bedpost, Rand
pushed himself erect, grounding Callandor’s point on the
littered carpet and resting both hands on the hilt. If he leaned
a little on the sword, it did not show much. “I won’t be
chased any more. Not even out of a bed.”
“
Tai’ shar Manetheren,” Lan murmured.
This time even Rhuarc looked startled, but if Moiraine heard
the Warder compliment Rand, she gave no sign of it. She was
staring at Rand, her face smooth but thunderheads in her
eyes. Rand wore a quizzical little smile, as if wondering what
she would try next.
Perrin edged toward the doors. If Rand and the Aes Sedai
were going to match wills, he would just as soon be elsewhere.
Lan did not appear to care; it was hard to tell with that
stance of his, somehow standing with his back straight and
slouching at the same time. He could have been bored enough
to sleep where he stood or ready to draw his sword; his
manner suggested either, or both. Rhuarc stood much the
same, but he was eyeing the doors, too.
“Stay where you are!” Moiraine did not look away from
Rand, and her outflung finger pointed halfway between Perrin
and Rhuarc, but Perrin’s feet stopped just the same. Rhuarc
shrugged and folded his arms.
“Stubborn,” Moiraine muttered. This time the word was for
Rand. “Very well. If you mean to stand there until you drop,
you can use the time before you fall on your face to tell me
what occurred here. I cannot teach you, but if you tell me
perhaps I can see what you did wrong. A small chance, but
perhaps I can.” Her voice sharpened. “You must learn to
control it, and I do not mean just because of things like this.
If you do not learn to control the Power, it will kill you. You
know that. I have told you often enough. You must teach
yourself. You must find it within yourself.”
“I did nothing except survive,” he said in a dry voice. She
opened her mouth, but he went on. “Do you think I could
channel and not know it? I didn’t do it in my sleep. This
happened awake.” He wavered, and caught himself on the
sword.
“Even you could not channel anything but Spirit asleep,”
Moiraine said coolly, “and this was never done with Spirit. I
was about to ask what did happen.”
Perrin felt his hackles rising as Rand told his story. The axe
had been bad enough, but at least the axe was something
solid, something real. To have your own reflection jump out of
mirrors at you . . . . Unconsciously he shifted his feet, trying
not to stand on any fragments of glass.
Soon after he began speaking, Rand glanced behind him at
the chest, a quick look, as if he did not want it observed. After
a moment the slivers of silvered glass that were scattered
across the lid of the chest stirred and slid off onto the carpet
as though pushed by an unseen broom. Rand exchanged looks
with Moiraine, then sat down slowly and went on. Perrin was
not sure which of them had cleared the chest top. There was
no mention of Berelain in the tale.
“It must have been one of the Forsaken,” Rand finished at
last. “Maybe Sammael. You said he’s in Illian. Unless one of
them is here in Tear. Could Sammael reach the Stone from
Illian?”
“Not even if he held Callandor,” Moiraine told him. “There
are limits. Sammael is only a man, not the Dark One.”
Only a man? Not a very good description, Perrin thought. A
man who could channel, but who somehow had not gone
mad; at least, not yet, not that anyone knew. A man perhaps
as strong as Rand, but where Rand was trying to learn,
Sammael knew every trick of his talents already. A man who
had spent three thousand years trapped in the Dark One’s
prison, a man who had gone over to the Shadow of his own
choice. No. “Only a man” did not begin to describe Sammael,
or any of the Forsaken, male or female.
“Then one of them is here. In the city.” Rand put his head
down on his wrists, but jerked himself erect immediately,
glaring at those in the room. “I’ll not be chased again. I’ll be
the hound, first. I will find him—or her—and I will—”
“Not one of the Forsaken,” Moiraine cut in. “I think not. This
was too simple. And too complex.”
Rand spoke calmly. “No riddles, Moiraine. If not the
Forsaken, who? Or what?”
The Aes Sedai’s face could have done for an anvil, yet she
hesitated, feeling her way. There was no telling whether she
was unsure of the answer or deciding how much to reveal.
“As the seals holding the Dark One’s prison weaken,” she
said after a time, “it may be inevitable that a . . . miasma . . .
will escape even while he is still held. Like bubbles rising from
the things rotting on the bottom of a pond. But these bubbles
will drift through the Pattern until they attach to a thread and
burst.”
“Light!” It slipped out before Perrin could stop it. Moiraine’s
eyes turned to him. “You mean what happened to . . . to
Rand is going to start happening to everybody?”
“Not to everyone. Not yet, at least. In the beginning I think
there will only be a few bubbles, slipping through cracks the
Dark One can reach through. Later, who can say? And just as
ta’veren bend the other threads in the Pattern around them, I
think perhaps ta’veren will tend to attract these bubbles more
powerfully than others do.” Her eyes said she knew Rand was
not the only one to have had a waking nightmare. A brief
touch of a smile, there and gone almost before he saw it, said
he could keep silent if he wished to hold it secret from others.
But she knew. “Yet in the months to come—the years, should
we be lucky enough to have that long—I fear a good many
people will see things to give them white hairs, if they survive.”
“Mat,” Rand said. “Do you know if he . . . ? Is he . . . ?”
“I will know soon enough,” Moiraine replied calmly. “What is
done cannot be undone, but we can hope.” Whatever her
tone, though, she smelled ill at ease until Rhuarc spoke.
“He is well. Or was. I saw him on my way here.”
“Going where?” Moiraine said with an edge in her voice.
“He looked to be heading for the servants’ quarters,” the
Aielman told her. He knew that the three were ta’veren, if not
as much else as he thought he did, and he knew Mat well
enough to add, “Not the stables, Aes Sedai. The other way,
toward the river. And there are no boats at the Stone’s
docks.” He did not stumble over words like “boat” and “dock”
the way most of the Aiel did, although in the Waste such
things existed only in stories.
She nodded as if she had expected nothing else. Perrin
shook his head; she was so used to hiding her real thoughts,
she seemed to veil them out of habit.
Suddenly one of the doors opened and Bain and Chiad
slipped in, without their spears. Bain was carrying a large white
bowl and a fat pitcher with steam rising from the top. Chiad
had towels folded under her arm.
“Why are you bringing this?” Moiraine demanded.
Chiad shrugged. “She would not come in.”
Rand barked a laugh. “Even the servants know enough to
stay clear of me. Put it anywhere.”
“Your time is running out, Rand,” Moiraine said. “The Tairens
are becoming used to you, after a fashion, and no one fears
what is familiar as much as what is strange. How many weeks,
or days, before someone tries to put an arrow in your back
or poison in your food? How long before one of the Forsaken
strikes, or another bubble comes sliding along the Pattern?”
“Don’t try to harry me, Moiraine.” He was blood filthy, half
naked, more than half leaning on Callandor to stay sitting up,
but he managed to fill those words with quiet command. “I will
not run for you, either.”
“Choose your way soon,” she said. “And this time, inform me
what you mean to do. My knowledge cannot aid you if you
refuse to accept my help.”
“Your help?” Rand said wearily. “I’ll take your help. But I will
decide, not you.” He looked at Perrin as if trying to tell him
something without words, something he did not want the
others to hear. Perrin had not a clue what it was. After a
moment Rand sighed; his head sank a little. “I want to sleep.
All of you, go away. Please. We will talk tomorrow.” His eyes
flickered to Perrin again, underscoring the words for him.
Moiraine crossed the room to Bain and Chiad, and the two
Aiel women leaned close so she could speak for their ears
alone. Perrin heard only a buzz, and wondered if she was
using the Power to stop him eavesdropping. She knew the
keenness of his hearing. He was sure of it when Bain
whispered back and he still could not make out anything. The
Aes Sedai had done nothing about his sense of smell, though.
The Aiel women looked at Rand as they listened, and they
smelled wary. Not afraid, but as if Rand were a large animal
that would be dangerous if they misstepped.
The Aes Sedai turned back to Rand. “We will talk tomorrow.
You cannot sit like a partridge waiting for a hunter’s net.” She
was moving for the door before Rand could reply. Lan looked
at Rand as if about to say something, but followed her without
speaking.
“Rand?” Perrin said.
“We do what we have to.” Rand did not look up from the
clear hilt between his hands. “We all do what we have to.” He
smelled afraid.
Perrin nodded and followed Rhuarc out of the room.
Moiraine and Lan were nowhere in sight. The Tairen officer
was staring at the doors from ten paces off, trying to pretend
the distance was his choice and had nothing to do with the
four Aiel women watching him. The other two Maidens were
still in the bedchamber, Perrin realized. He heard voices from
the room.
“Go away,” Rand said tiredly. “Just put that down and go
away.”
“If you can stand up,” Chiad said cheerfully, “we will. Only
stand.”
There was the sound of water splashing into a bowl. “We
have tended to wounded before,” Bain said in soothing tones.
“And I used to wash my brothers when they were little.”
Rhuarc pushed the door shut, cutting off the rest.
“You do not treat him the way the Tairens do,” Perrin said
quietly. “No bowing and scraping. I don’t think I have heard
one of you call him Lord Dragon.”
“The Dragon Reborn is a wetlander prophecy,” Rhuarc said.
“Ours is He Who Comes With the Dawn.”
“I thought they were the same. Else why did you come to
the Stone? Burn me, Rhuarc, you Aiel are the People of the
Dragon, just as the Prophecies say. You’ve as good as
admitted it, even if you won’t say it out loud.”
Rhuarc ignored the last part. “In your Prophecies of the
Dragon, the fall of the Stone and the taking of Callandor
proclaim that the Dragon has been Reborn. Our prophecy says
only that the Stone must fall before He Who Comes With the
Dawn appears to take us back to what was ours. They may
be one man, but I doubt even the Wise Ones could say for
sure. If Rand is the one, there are things he must do yet to
prove it.”
“What?” Perrin demanded.
“If he is the one, he will know, and do them. If he does not,
then our search still goes on.”
Something unreadable in the Aielman’s voice pricked Perrin’s
ears. “And if he isn’t the one you search for? What then,
Rhuarc?”
“Sleep well and safely, Perrin.” Rhuarc’s soft boots made no
sound on the black marble as he walked away.
The Tairen officer was still staring past the Maidens, smelling
of fear, failing to mask the anger and hatred on his face. If
the Aiel decided Rand was not He Who Comes With the
Dawn . . . . Perrin studied the Tairen officer’s face and
thought of the Maidens not being there, of the Stone empty of
Aiel, and he shivered. He had to make sure Faile decided to
leave. That was all there was for it. She had to decide to go,
and without him.