Thunder rumbled above, soft and menacing like the growl of a
distant beast. Perrin turned his eyes toward the sky. A few
days ago, the pervasive cloud cover had turned black,
darkening like the advent of a horrible storm. But rain had
come only in spurts.
Another rumble shook the air. There was no lightning. Perrin
patted Stayer on the neck; the horse smelled skittish—prickly,
sweaty. The horse wasn’t the only one. That scent hung above
his enormous force of troops and refugees as they tramped
across the muddy ground. That force created a thunder of its
own, footsteps, hoofbeats, wagon wheels turning, men and
women calling.
They had nearly reached the Jehannah Road. Originally,
Perrin had planned to cross that and continue on northward,
toward Andor. But he’d lost a great deal of time to the
sickness that had struck his camp—both Asha’man had nearly
died. Then this thick mud had slowed them even further. All
told, it had been over a month since they’d left Malden, and
they’d traveled only as far as Perrin had originally hoped to go
in a week.
Perrin put his hand into his coat pocket, feeling at the small
blacksmith’s puzzle there. They’d found it in Malden, and he’d
taken to fiddling with it. So far, he hadn’t figured out how to
get the pieces apart. It was as complex a puzzle as he’d ever
seen.
There was no sign of Master Gill or the people Perrin had
sent on ahead with supplies. Grady had managed a few small
gateways ahead to send scouts to find them, but they had
returned without news. Perrin was beginning to worry about
them.
“My Lord?” a man asked. He stood beside Perrin’s horse.
Turne was a lanky fellow with curly red hair and a beard he
tied off with leather cords. He carried a warrior’s axe in a loop
at his belt, a wicked thing with a spike at the back.
“We can’t pay you much,” Perrin said. “Your men don’t have
horses?”
“No, my Lord,” Turne said, glancing at his dozen companions.
“Jarr had one. We ate it a few weeks back.” Turne smelled
unwashed and dirty, and above those scents was an odd
staleness. Had the man’s emotions gone numb? “If you don’t
mind, my Lord. Wages can wait. If you have food…well, that
will be enough for now.”
I should turn them away, Perrin thought. We already have
too many mouths to feed. Light, he was supposed to be
getting rid of people. But these fellows looked handy with their
weapons, and if he turned them away, they’d no doubt turn to
pillaging.
“Go walk down the line,” Perrin said. “Find a man named
Tam al’Thor—he’s a sturdy fellow, dressed like a farmer.
Anyone should be able to point you in his direction. Tell him
you spoke to Perrin, and I said to take you on for meals.”
The dirty men relaxed, and their lanky leader actually smelled
grateful. Grateful! Sell-swords—maybe bandits—grateful to be
taken on only for meals. That was the state of the world.
“Tell me, my Lord,” Turne said as his group began to hike
down the line of refugees. “Do you really have food?”
“We do,” Perrin said. “I just said so.”
“And it doesn’t spoil after a night left alone?”
“Course it doesn’t,” Perrin said sternly. “Not if you keep it
right.” Some of their grain might have weevils in it, but it was
edible. The man seemed to find that incredible, as if Perrin
had said his wagons would soon sprout wings and fly off for
the mountains.
“Go on now,” Perrin said. “And make sure to tell your men
that we run a tight camp. No fighting, no stealing. If I get a
whiff of you making trouble, you’ll be out on your ears.”
“Yes, my Lord,” Turne said, then hastened off to join his
men. He smelled sincere. Tam wasn’t going to be pleased to
have another batch of mercenaries to watch over, but the
Shaido were still out there somewhere. Most of them seemed
to have turned eastward. But with how slowly Perrin’s force
had been traveling, he was worried the Aiel might change their
minds and come back for him.
He nudged Stayer forward, flanked by a pair of Two Rivers
men. Now that Aram was gone, the Two Rivers men
had—unfortunately—taken it upon themselves to provide Perrin
with bodyguards. Today’s annoyances were Wil al’Seen and
Reed Soalen. Perrin had tried chewing out the men about it.
But they insisted, and he had bigger worries to bother him,
not the least of which were his strange dreams. Haunting
visions of working the forges and being unable to create
anything of worth.
Put them out of your mind, he told himself, riding up the
long column, al’Seen and Soalen keeping up. You have
nightmares enough while awake. Deal with those first.
The meadow around him was open, though the grass was
yellowing, and he noticed with displeasure several large swaths
of dead wildflowers, rotting. The spring rains had turned most
areas like this into mud traps. Moving so many refugees was
slow, even discounting the bubble of evil and the mud.
Everything took longer than he expected, including getting out
of Malden.
The force kicked up mud as it marched; most of the
refugees’ trousers and skirts were covered with it, and the air
was thick with its sticky scent. Perrin neared the front of their
line, passing riders in red breastplates, lances held high, their
helms like rimmed pots. The Winged Guards of Mayene. Lord
Gallenne rode at their front, red-plumed helm held at his side.
His bearing was formal enough that you might think he was
riding in a parade, but his single eye was keen as he scanned
the countryside. He was a good soldier. There were a lot of
good soldiers in this force, though sometimes it was tough as
bending a horseshoe to keep their hands from one another’s
throats.
“Lord Perrin!” a voice shouted. Arganda, First Captain of
Ghealdan, pushed through the Mayener lines riding a tall roan
gelding. His troops rode in a wide column beside the
Mayeners—ever since Alliandre’s return, Arganda had been set
on equal treatment. He’d complained that the Winged Guards
often rode in front. Rather than spur further arguments, Perrin
had ordered their columns to ride side by side.
“Was that another batch of mercenaries?” Arganda
demanded, pulling his horse up beside Perrin.
“A small band,” Perrin said. “Probably once the guard of
some local city’s lord.”
“Deserters.” Arganda spat to the side. “You should have sent
for me. My queen would want them strung up! Don’t forget
that we’re in Ghealdan now.”
“Your queen is my liegewoman,” Perrin said as they reached
the front of the column. “We’re not stringing anyone up unless
we have proof of their crimes. Once everyone is safely back
where they belong, you can start sorting through the
sell-swords and see if you can charge any of them. Until then,
they’re just hungry men looking for someone to follow.”
Arganda smelled frustrated. Perrin had gained a few weeks of
goodwill from him and Gallenne following the successful assault
on Malden, but old divisions were resurfacing in the endless
mud, under a sky full of tumbling thunderheads.
“Don’t worry yourself,” Perrin said. “I have men watching
over the newcomers.” He also had them watching the refugees.
Some were so docile that they would hardly go to the privy
without being instructed to do so; others kept looking over
their shoulders, as if expecting Shaido to spring from the
distant line of oaks and sweetgum trees at any moment. People
who smelled that terrified could be trouble, and the various
factions of his camp already walked as if trudging through
itchweed.
“You may send someone to talk to the newcomers, Arganda,”
Perrin said. “Talk only. Find out where they’re from, learn
whether they did serve a lord, see if they can add anything to
the maps.” They didn’t have any good maps of the area, and
had been forced to have the Ghealdanin men—Arganda
included—draw some from memory.
Arganda rode off, and Perrin moved to the front of the
column. Being in charge did have its nice moments; up here,
the smells of unwashed bodies and pungent mud weren’t
nearly so strong. Ahead, he could finally see the Jehannah
Road like a long strap of leather cutting through the highland
plains, running in a northwestern direction.
Perrin rode, lost in thought for a time. Eventually, they
reached the roadway. The mud didn’t look as bad on the road
as it had in the meadows—though if it were like any other
road Perrin had traveled on, it would have its mires and
washed-out sections. As he reached it, he noticed Gaul
approaching. The Aiel had been off scouting ahead, and as
Perrin’s horse stepped up onto the road, he noticed that
someone was riding behind Gaul up toward them.
It was Fennel, one of the farriers that Perrin had sent ahead
with Master Gill and the others. Perrin felt a wash of relief to
see him, but it was followed by worry. Where were the others?
“Lord Perrin!” the man said, riding up. Gaul stepped to the
side. Fennel was a wide-shouldered man, and carried a
long-handled workman’s axe strapped to his back. He smelled
of relief. “Praise the Light. I thought you’d never get here.
Your man says the rescue worked?”
“It did, Fennel,” Perrin said, frowning. “Where are the
others?”
“They went on ahead, my Lord,” Fennel said, bowing from
horseback. “I volunteered to stay behind, for when you caught
up. We needed to explain, you see.”
“Explain?”
“The rest turned toward Lugard,” Fennel explained. “Along
the road.”
“What?” Perrin said, frustrated. “I gave them orders to
continue northward!”
“My Lord,” Fennel said, looking abashed. “We met travelers
coming from that way; said that mud made the roads to the
north almost completely impassable for wagons or carts. Master
Gill decided that heading to Caemlyn through Lugard would be
the best way to follow your orders. Sorry, my Lord. That’s
why one of us had to stay behind.”
Light! No wonder the scouts hadn’t found Gill and the others.
They’d gone in the wrong direction. Well, after slogging through
mud for weeks himself—sometimes having to stop and wait out
storms—Perrin couldn’t blame them for deciding to take the
road. That didn’t stop him from feeling frustrated.
“How far behind are we?” Perrin asked.
“I’ve been here five days, my Lord.”
So Gill and the others had been slowed too. Well, that was
something, at least.
“Go get yourself something to eat, Fennel,” Perrin said. “And
thank you for staying behind to let me know what happened.
It was a brave thing you did, waiting alone for so long.”
“Somebody had to do it, my Lord.” He hesitated. “Most
feared you hadn’t…well, that things had gone wrong, my Lord.
You see, we figured you’d be faster than us, since we had
those carts. But from the look of things here, you decided to
bring the entire town with you!”
It wasn’t far from the truth, unfortunately. He waved Fennel
on.
“I found him about an hour along the road,” Gaul said softly.
“Beside a hill that would make an excellent camp. Well watered,
with a good view of the surrounding area.”
Perrin nodded. They’d have to decide what to do—wait until
Grady and Neald could make large gateways, follow along after
Master Gill and the others on foot, or send most people
northward and send only a few toward Lugard. Regardless of
the decision, it would be good to camp for the day and sort
through things. “Pass the word to the others, if you will,”
Perrin said to Gaul. “We’ll hike down the road to the place
you found, then discuss what to do next. And ask some of the
Maidens if they’d scout along the road in the other direction to
make sure we’re not going to be surprised by anyone moving
up the road behind us.”
Gaul nodded and moved off to pass the word. Perrin
remained sitting atop Stayer, thinking. He had half a mind to
send Arganda and Alliandre off to the northwest right now,
setting on a path to Jehannah. But the Maidens had picked
out some Shaido scouts watching his army. Those were
probably there to make sure Perrin wasn’t a threat, but they
made him uneasy. These were dangerous times.
It was best to keep Alliandre and her people with him for
now, both for her safety and his own, at least until Grady and
Neald recovered. The snakebites from the bubble of evil had
affected the two of them and Masuri—the only one of the Aes
Sedai who had been bitten—worse than the others.
Still, Grady was starting to look hale again. Soon he’d be able
to make a gateway large enough to move the army through.
Then Perrin could send Alliandre and the Two Rivers men
home. He himself could Travel back to Rand, pretend to make
up—most people would still think that he and Rand had parted
ways angrily—and then finally be rid of Berelain and her
Winged Guards. Everything could go back to the way it should
be.
Light send it all went that easily. He shook his head,
dispelling the swirling colors and visions that appeared to his
eyes whenever he thought of Rand.
Nearby, Berelain and her force were marching out onto the
road, looking very pleased to reach some solid footing. The
beautiful dark-haired woman wore a fine green dress and a
belt of firedrops. Her neckline was discomfortingly low. He’d
started relying on her during Faile’s absence, once she’d
stopped treating him like a prize boar to be hunted and
skinned.
Faile was back now, and it appeared his truce with Berelain
was over. As usual, Annoura rode near her, though she didn’t
spend the time chatting with Berelain as she once had. Perrin
never had figured out why she’d been meeting with the
Prophet. Probably never would, considering what had happened
to Masema. A day out of Malden, Perrin’s scouts had run
across a group of corpses that had been killed with arrows
and robbed of their shoes, belts, and any valuables. Though
ravens had gotten the eyes, Perrin had smelled Masema’s scent
through the rot.
The Prophet was dead, killed by bandits. Well, perhaps that
was a fitting end for him, but Perrin still felt he’d failed. Rand
had wanted Masema brought to him. The colors swirled again.
Either way, it was time for Perrin to return to Rand. The
colors swirled, showing Rand standing in front of a building
with a burned front, staring westward. Perrin banished the
image.
His duty was done, the Prophet seen to, Alliandre’s allegiance
secure. Only, Perrin felt as if something were still very wrong.
He fingered the blacksmith’s puzzle in his pocket. To
understand something…you have to figure out its parts…
He smelled Faile before she reached him, heard her horse on
the soft earth. “So, Gill turned toward Lugard?” she asked,
stopping beside him.
He nodded.
“That may have been wise. Perhaps we should turn that way
too. Were those more sell-swords who joined us?”
“Yes.”
“We must have picked up five thousand people these last few
weeks,” she said thoughtfully. “Perhaps more. Odd, in this
desolate landscape.”
She was beautiful, with her raven hair and strong features—a
good Saldaean nose set between two tilted eyes. She was
dressed for riding in deep wine red. He loved her dearly, and
praised the Light that he’d gotten her back. Why did he feel
so awkward around her now?
“You’re troubled, my husband,” she noted. She understood
him so well, it was almost as if she could read scents. It
seemed to be a thing of women, though. Berelain could do it
too.
“We’ve gathered too many people,” he said with a grunt. “I
should start turning them away.”
“I suspect they’d find their way back to our force anyway.”
“Why should they? I could leave orders.”
“You can’t give orders to the Pattern itself, my husband.” She
glanced over at the column of people as they moved onto the
road.
“What do—” He cut off, catching her meaning. “You think
this is me? Being ta’veren
?”
“Every stop along our trip, you’ve gained more followers,”
Faile said. “Despite our losses against the Aiel, we came out of
Malden with a stronger force than when we started. Haven’t
you found it odd that so many of the former gai’shain are
taking to Tam’s training with weapons?”
“They were beaten down so long,” Perrin said. “They want to
stop that from happening again.”
“And so coopers learn the sword,” Faile said, “and find they
have a talent for it. Masons who never thought of fighting
back against the Shaido now train with the quarterstaff.
Sell-swords and armsmen flock to us.”
“It’s coincidence.”
“Coincidence?” She sounded amused. “With a ta’veren at the
army’s head?”
She was right, and as he fell silent, he could smell her
satisfaction at winning the argument. He didn’t think of it as
an argument, but she’d see it as one. If anything, she’d be
mad that he hadn’t raised his voice.
“This is all going to end in a few days, Faile,” he said. “Once
we have gateways again, I’ll send these people to their proper
places. I’m not gathering an army. I’m helping some refugees
to get home.” The last thing he needed was more people
calling him “my Lord” and bowing and scraping.
“We shall see,” she said.
“Faile.” He sighed and lowered his voice. “A man’s got to see
a thing for what it is. No sense in calling a buckle a hinge or
calling a nail a horseshoe. I’ve told you; I’m not a good leader.
I proved that.”
“That’s not how I see it.”
He gripped the blacksmith’s puzzle in his pocket. They’d
discussed this during the weeks since Malden, but she refused
to see sense. “The camp was a mess while you were gone,
Faile! I’ve told you how Arganda and the Maidens nearly killed
one another. And Aram—Masema corrupted him right under
my nose. The Aes Sedai played at games I can’t guess, and
the Two Rivers men…you see how they look at me with
shame in their eyes.”
Faile’s scent spiked with anger when he said that, and she
turned sharply toward Berelain.
“It’s not her fault,” Perrin said. “If I’d been able to think of
it, I’d have stopped the rumors dead. But I didn’t. Now I’ve
got to sleep in the bed I made for myself. Light! What is a
man if his own neighbors don’t think well of him? I’m no lord,
Faile, and that’s that. I’ve proven it soundly.”
“Odd,” she said. “But I’ve been speaking to the others, and
they tell a different story. They say that you kept Arganda
contained and put out flare-ups in camp. Then there’s the
alliance with the Seanchan; the more I learn of that, the more
impressed I am. You acted decisively in a time of great
uncertainty, you focused everyone’s efforts, and you
accomplished the impossible in taking Malden. Those are the
actions of a leader.”
“Faile…” he said, suppressing a growl. Why wouldn’t she
listen? When she’d been a captive, nothing had mattered to
him but recovering her. Nothing. It didn’t matter who had
needed his help, or what orders he’d been given. Tarmon
Gai’don itself could have started, and he’d have ignored it in
order to find Faile.
He realized now how dangerous his actions had been.
Trouble was, he’d take those same actions again. He didn’t
regret what he’d done, not for a moment. A leader couldn’t be
like that.
He never should have let them raise that wolfhead banner in
the first place. Now that he’d completed his tasks, now that
Faile was back, it was time to put all of that foolishness behind
him. Perrin was a blacksmith. It didn’t matter what Faile
dressed him in, or what titles people gave him. You couldn’t
make a drawknife into a horseshoe by painting it, or by calling
it something different.
He turned to the side, where Jori Congar rode before the
column, that blasted red wolfhead banner flapping proudly from
a pole taller than a cavalryman’s lance. Perrin opened his
mouth to shout for him to take it down, but Faile spoke
suddenly.
“Yes, indeed,” she said, musingly. “I’ve been thinking on this
for the last few weeks, and—odd though it seems—I believe my
captivity may have been precisely what we needed. Both of
us.”
What? Perrin turned to her, smelling her thoughtfulness. She
believed what she’d said.
“Now,” Faile said, “we need to speak of—”
“Scouts returning,” he said, perhaps more abruptly than he
intended. “Aiel up ahead.”
Faile glanced as he pointed, but of course she couldn’t see
anything yet. She knew of his eyes, though. She was one of
the few who did.
The call went up as others noticed the three figures in
cadin’sor approaching alongside the road, the ones Perrin had
sent to scout. Two Maidens hurried for the Wise Ones and
one loped up to Perrin.
“There is something beside the road, Perrin Aybara,” the
woman said. She smelled concerned. That was a dangerous
sign. “It is something that you will wish to see.”
Galad woke to the sound of a tent flap rustling. Sharp pains
burned at his side where he had been repeatedly kicked; they
matched the duller aches on his shoulder, left arm, and thigh
where he’d been wounded by Valda. His pounding headache
was almost strong enough to drown out all else.
He groaned, rolling onto his back. All was dark around him,
but pinprick lights shone in the sky. Stars? It had been
overcast for so long.
No…something was wrong about them. His head pulsed with
pain, and he blinked tears from the corner of his eyes. Those
stars looked so faint, so distant. They made no familiar
patterns. Where could Asunawa have taken him that the very
stars were different?
As his mind cleared, he began to make out his surroundings.
This was a heavy sleeping tent, constructed to be dark during
the daylight hours. The lights above weren’t stars at all, but
sunlight through the occasional pinholes of wear in the canvas.
He was still naked, and with tentative fingers he determined
that there was dried blood on his face. It had come from a
long gash in his forehead. If he didn’t wash it soon, infection
was likely. He lay on his back, breathing in and out with care.
If he took in too much air at once, his side screamed.
Galad did not fear death or pain. He had made the right
choices. It was unfortunate that he’d needed to leave the
Questioners in charge; they were controlled by the Seanchan.
However, there had been no other option, not after he’d
walked into Asunawa’s hands.
Galad felt no anger at the scouts who had betrayed him. The
Questioners were a valid source of authority in the Children,
and their lies had no doubt been convincing. No, the one he
was angry at was Asunawa, who took what was true and
muddied it. There were many who did that in the world, but
the Children should be different.
Soon the Questioners would come for him, and then the true
price for saving his men would be exacted with their hooks
and knives. He had been aware of that price when he’d made
his decision. In a way, he had won, for he had manipulated
the situation best.
The other way to ensure his victory was to hold to the truth
under their questioning. To deny being a Darkfriend with his
final breath. It would be difficult, but it would be right.
He forced himself to sit up, expecting—and weathering—the
dizziness and nausea. He felt around. His legs were chained
together, and that chain was locked to a spike that had been
driven deep into the earth, piercing the rough canvas tent
bottom.
He tried yanking it free, just in case. He pulled so hard that
his muscles failed him and he nearly passed out. Once he had
recovered, he crawled to the side of the tent. His chains gave
him enough room to reach the flaps. He took one of the cloth
ties—used to hold the flaps up when they were opened—and
spat on it. Then, methodically, he wiped the grime and blood
from his face.
The cleaning gave him a goal, kept him moving and stopped
him from thinking about the pain. He carefully scrubbed the
crusted blood from his cheek and nose. It was difficult; his
mouth was dry. He bit down on his tongue to get saliva. The
strips were not canvas, but a lighter material. They smelled of
dust.
He spat on a fresh section, then worked the spittle into the
cloth. The wound to his head, the dirt on his face…these things
were marks of victory for the Questioners. He would not leave
them. He would go into their tortures with a clean face.
He heard shouts outside. Men preparing to break down the
camp. Would that delay their questioning? He doubted it.
Striking camp could take hours. Galad continued cleaning,
soiling the lengths of both straps, using the work as a kind of
ritual, a rhythmic pattern to give him a focus for meditation.
His headache withdrew, the pains of his body becoming less
significant.
He would not run. Even if he could escape, fleeing would
invalidate his bargain with Asunawa. But he would face his
enemies with self-respect.
As he finished, he heard voices outside the tent. They were
coming for him. He scrabbled quietly back to the stake in the
ground. Taking a deep breath despite the pain, he rolled onto
his knees. Then he took the top of the iron spike in his left
hand and pushed, heaving himself to his feet.
He wobbled, then steadied himself, standing up all the way.
His pains were nothing, now. He had felt insect bites that were
worse. He put his feet wide in a warrior’s stance, his hands
held before himself with his wrists crossed. He opened his eyes,
back straight, staring at the tent flaps. It wasn’t the cloak, the
uniform, the heraldry, or the sword that made a man. It was
the way he held himself.
The flaps rustled, then drew open. The outside light was
brilliant to Galad’s eyes, but he did not blink. He did not flinch.
Silhouettes moved against an overcast sky. They hesitated,
backlit. He could tell they were surprised to see him standing
there.
“Light!” one exclaimed. “Damodred, how is it that you’re
awake?” Unexpectedly, the voice was familiar.
“Trom?” Galad asked, his voice ragged.
Men spilled into the room. As his eyes adjusted, Galad made
out stocky Trom, along with Bornhald and Byar. Trom fumbled
with a set of keys.
“Stop!” Galad said. “I gave orders to you three. Bornhald,
there is blood on your cloak! I commanded you not to try to
free me!”
“Your men obeyed your orders, Damodred,” a new voice
said. Galad looked up to see three men entering the room:
Berab Golever, tall and bearded; Alaabar Harnesh, his bald,
shadowed head missing its left ear; Brandel Vordarian, a blond
hulk of a man from Galad’s native Andor. All three were Lords
Captain, all three had stood with Asunawa.
“What is this?” Galad asked them.
Harnesh opened a sack and dumped something bulbous to
the ground in front of Galad. A head.
Asunawa’s.
All three men drew swords and knelt before him, the points
of their weapons stabbing the canvas. Trom unlocked the
manacles at Galad’s feet.
“I see,” Galad said. “You have turned your swords on fellow
Children.”
“What would you have had us do?” Brandel asked, looking
up from his kneeling position.
Galad shook his head. “I do not know. Perhaps you are
right; I should not chide you on this choice. It may have been
the only one you could have made. But why did you change
your minds?”
“We have lost two Lords Captain Commander in under half a
year,” Harnesh said in a gruff voice. “The Fortress of the Light
has become a playground for the Seanchan. The world is in
chaos.”
“And yet,” Golever said, “Asunawa marched us all the way
out here to have us battle our fellow Children. It was not right,
Damodred. We all saw how you presented yourself, we all saw
how you stopped us from killing one another. Faced with that,
and with the High Inquisitor naming as Darkfriend a man we
all know to be honorable…Well, how could we not turn against
him?”
Galad nodded. “You accept me as Lord Captain
Commander?”
The three men bowed their heads. “All the Lords Captain are
for you,” Golever said. “We were forced to kill a third of those
who wore the red shepherd’s crook of the Hand of the Light.
Some others united with us; some tried to flee. The Amadicians
did not interfere, and many have said they’d rather join with
us than return to the Seanchan. We have the other
Amadicians—and the Questioners who tried to run—held at
swordpoint.”
“Let free those who wish to leave,” Galad said. “They may
return to their families and their masters. By the time they
reach the Seanchan, we will be beyond their grasp.”
The men nodded.
“I accept your allegiance,” Galad said. “Gather the other Lords
Captain and fetch me supply reports. Strike camp. We march
for Andor.”
None of them asked whether he needed rest, though Trom
did look worried. Galad accepted the white robe a Child
brought to him, and then sat in a hastily supplied chair as
another—Child Candeiar, a man expert in wounds—entered to
inspect his injuries.
Galad didn’t feel wise or strong enough to bear the title he
did. But the Children had made their decision.
The Light would protect them for it.

Perrin ran through the darkness. Trails of watery mist brushed
his face and condensed in his beard. His mind was foggy,
distant. Where was he going? What was he doing? Why was
he running?
He roared and charged, ripping through the veiled darkness
and bursting into open air. He took a deep breath and landed
on the top of a steep hill covered with short, patchy grass,
with a ring of trees at its base. The sky rumbled and churned
with clouds, like a boiling pot of tar.
He was in the wolf dream. His body slumbered in the real
world, on this hilltop, with Faile. He smiled, breathing deeply.
His problems had not diminished. In fact, with the Whitecloak
ultimatum, they seemed magnified. But all was well with Faile.
That simple fact changed so much. With her at his side, he
could do anything.
He leaped down from the hillside and crossed the open area
where his army camped. They had been here long enough
that signs had appeared in the wolf dream. Tents reflected the
waking world, though their flaps were in a different position
each time he looked at them. Cook-fire pits in the ground, ruts
in the pathways, occasional bits of refuse or discarded tools.
These would pop into existence, then vanish.
He moved quickly through the camp, each step taking him
ten paces. Once he might have found the lack of people in the
camp eerie, but he was accustomed to the wolf dream now.
This was natural.
Perrin approached the statue at the side of the camp, then
looked up at the age-pocked stone, overgrown with lichen of
black, orange and green. The statue must have been posed
oddly, if it had fallen in such a way. It almost looked as if it
had been created this way—an enormous arm bursting from
the loam.
Perrin turned to the southeast, toward where the Whitecloak
camp would be found. He had to deal with them. He was
increasingly certain—confident, even—that he could not continue
until he had confronted these shadows from the past.
There was one way to deal with them for certain. A careful
trap using the Asha’man and Wise Ones, and Perrin could hit
the Children so hard that they shattered. He could maybe even
destroy them permanently as a group.
He had the means, the opportunity, and the motivation. No
more fear in the land, no more Whitecloak mock trials. He
leaped forward, soaring thirty feet and falling lightly to the
ground. Then he took off, running southeast along the road.
He found the Whitecloak camp in a forested hollow,
thousands of white tents set up in tight rings. The tents of
some ten thousand Children, along with another ten thousand
mercenaries and other soldiers. Balwer estimated that this was
the bulk of the remaining Children, though he had been
unclear on how he’d gotten that knowledge. Hopefully the
dusty man’s hatred of the Whitecloaks wasn’t clouding his
judgment.
Perrin moved among the tents, looking to see if he could
discover anything that Elyas and the Aiel had not. It was
unlikely, but he figured it was worth an attempt, while he was
here. Besides, he wanted to see the place with his own eyes.
He lifted flaps, moved between groupings of tents, inspecting
the place and getting a feel for it and its occupants. The camp
was arranged in a very orderly manner. The insides were less
stable than the tents themselves, but what he saw was also
kept orderly.
The Whitecloaks liked things neat, tidy and carefully folded.
And they liked to pretend the entire world could be polished
up and cleaned the same way, people defined and explained in
one or two words.
Perrin shook his head, making his way to the Lord Captain
Commander’s tent. The organization of the tents led him to it
easily, at the center ring. It wasn’t much larger than the other
tents, and Perrin ducked inside, trying to see if he could find
anything of use. It was furnished simply, with a bedroll that
was in a different position each time Perrin looked at it, along
with a table holding objects that vanished and appeared at
random.
Perrin stepped up to it, picking up something that appeared
there. A signet ring. He didn’t recognize the signet, a winged
dagger, but memorized it just before the ring vanished from his
fingers, too transient to stay long in the wolf dream. Though
he’d met with the Whitecloak leader, and corresponded with
the man, he didn’t know much about the man’s past. Perhaps
this would help.
He searched through the tent a while longer, finding nothing
of use, then went to the large tent where Gaul had explained
that many of the captives were being kept. Here, he saw
Master Gill’s hat appear for a moment, then vanish.
Satisfied, Perrin walked back out of the tent. As he did so,
he found something bothering him. Shouldn’t he have tried
something like this when Faile was kidnapped? He’d sent
numerous scouts to Malden. Light, he’d had to restrain himself
from marching off to find Faile on his own! But he’d never
tried visiting the place in the wolf dream.
Perhaps it would have been useless. But he hadn’t considered
the possibility, and that troubled him.
He froze, passing a cart parked beside one of the Whitecloak
tents. The back was open, and a grizzled silver wolf lay there,
watching him.
“I do let my attention grow too narrow, Hopper,” Perrin said.
“When I get consumed by a goal, it can make me careless.
That can be dangerous. As in battle, when concentrating on
the adversary in front of you can expose you to the archer on
the side.”
Hopper cracked his mouth open, smiling after the way of
wolves. He hopped from the cart. Perrin could sense other
wolves nearby—the others of the pack he had run with before.
Oak Dancer, Sparks and Boundless.
“All right,” he said to Hopper. “I’m ready to learn.”
Hopper sat down on his haunches, regarding Perrin. Follow,
the wolf sent.
Then vanished.
Perrin cursed, looking about. Where had the wolf gone? He
moved through the camp, searching, but couldn’t sense Hopper
anywhere. He reached out with his mind. Nothing.
Young Bull. Suddenly Hopper was behind him. Follow. He
vanished again.
Perrin growled, then moved about the camp in a flash. When
he didn’t find the wolf, he shifted to the field of grain where
he’d met Hopper last time. The wolf wasn’t there. Perrin stood
among the blowing grain, frustrated.
Hopper found him a few minutes later. The wolf smelled
dissatisfied. Follow! he sent.
“I don’t know how,” Perrin said. “Hopper, I don’t know
where you’re going.”
The wolf sat down. He sent an image of a wolf pup, joining
others of the pack. The pup watched his elders and did what
they did.
“I’m not a wolf, Hopper,” Perrin said. “I don’t learn the way
you do. You must explain to me what you want me to do.”
Follow here. The wolf sent an image of, oddly, Emond’s
Field. Then he vanished.
Perrin followed, appearing on a familiar green. A group of
buildings lined it, which felt wrong. Emond’s Field should have
been a little village, not a town with a stone wall and a road
running past the mayor’s inn, paved with stones. Much had
changed in the short time he had been away.
“Why have we come here?” Perrin asked. Disturbingly, the
wolfhead banner still flew on the pole above the green. It could
have been a trick of the wolf dream, but he doubted it. He
knew all too well how eagerly the people of the Two Rivers
flew the standard of “Perrin Goldeneyes.”
Men are strange, Hopper sent.
Perrin turned to the old wolf.
Men think strange thoughts, Hopper said. We do not try to
understand them. Why does the stag flee, the sparrow fly,
the tree grow? They do. That is all.
“Very well,” Perrin said.
I cannot teach a sparrow to hunt, Hopper continued. And
a sparrow does not teach a wolf to fly.
“But here, you can fly,” Perrin said.
Yes. And I was not taught. I know. Hopper’s scent was full
of emotion and confusion. Wolves all remembered everything
that one of their kind knew. Hopper was frustrated because he
wanted to teach Perrin, but wasn’t accustomed to doing things
in the way of people.
“Please,” Perrin said. “Try to explain to me what you mean.
You always tell me I’m here ‘too strongly.’ It’s dangerous, you
say. Why?”
You slumber, Hopper said. The other you. You cannot stay
here too long. You must always remember that you are
unnatural here. This is not your den.
Hopper turned toward the houses around them. This is your
den, the den of your sire. This place. Remember it. It will
keep you from being lost. This was how your kind once did
it. You understand.
It wasn’t a question, though it was something of a plea.
Hopper wasn’t certain how to explain further.
“I can try,” Perrin thought, interpreting the sending as best
he could. But Hopper was wrong. This place wasn’t his home.
Perrin’s home was with Faile. He needed to remember that,
somehow, to keep himself from getting drawn into the wolf
dream too strongly.
I have seen your she in your mind, Young Bull, Hopper
sent, cocking his head. She is like a hive of bees, with sweet
honey and sharp stings. Hopper’s image of Faile was that of
a very confusing female wolf. One who would playfully nip at
his nose one moment, then growl at him the next, refusing to
share her meat.
Perrin smiled.
The memory is part, Hopper sent. But the other part is
you. You must stay as Young Bull. A wolf’s reflection in the
water, shimmering and growing indistinct as ripples crossed it.
“I don’t understand.”
The strength of this place, Hopper sent an image of a wolf
carved of stone, is the strength of you. The wolf thought for
a moment. Stand. Remain. Be you.
With that, the wolf stood and backed up, as if preparing to
run at Perrin.
Confused, Perrin imagined himself as he was, holding that
image in his head as strongly as he could.
Hopper ran and jumped at him, slamming his body into
Perrin. He’d done this before, somehow forcing Perrin out of
the wolf dream.
This time, however, Perrin was set and waiting. Instinctively,
Perrin pushed back. The wolf dream wavered around him, but
then grew firm again. Hopper rebounded off him, though the
heavy wolf should have knocked Perrin to the ground.
Hopper shook his head, as if dazed. Good, he sent, pleased.
Good. You learn. Again.
Perrin steadied himself just in time to get slammed by
Hopper a second time. Perrin growled, but held steady.
Here, Hopper sent, giving an image of the field of grain.
Hopper vanished, and Perrin followed. As soon as he
appeared, the wolf slammed into him, mind and body.
Perrin fell to the ground this time, everything wavering and
shimmering. He felt himself being pushed away, forced out of
the wolf dream and into his ordinary dreams.
No! he thought, holding to an image of himself kneeling
among those fields of grain. He was there. He imagined it,
solid and real. He smelled the oats, the humid air, alive with
the scents of dirt and fallen leaves.
The landscape coalesced. He panted, kneeling on the ground,
but he was still in the wolf dream.
Good, Hopper sent. You learn quickly.
“There’s no other option,” Perrin said, climbing to his feet.
The Last Hunt comes, Hopper agreed, sending an image of
the Whitecloak camp.
Perrin followed, bracing himself. No attack came. He looked
around for the wolf.
Something slammed into his mind. There was no motion, only
the mental attack. It wasn’t as strong as before, but it was
unexpected. Perrin barely managed to fight it off.
Hopper fell from the air, landing gracefully on the ground.
Always be ready, the wolf sent. Always, but especially when
you move. An image of a careful wolf, testing the air before
moving out into an open pasture.
“I understand.”
But do not come too strongly, Hopper chided.
Immediately, Perrin forced himself to remember Faile and the
place where he slept. His home. He…faded slightly. His skin
didn’t grow translucent, and the wolf dream stayed the same,
but he felt more exposed.
Good, Hopper sent. Always ready, but never holding on
too strong. Like carrying a pup in your jaws.
“That’s not going to be an easy balance,” Perrin said.
Hopper gave a slightly confused scent. Of course it was
difficult.
Perrin smiled. “What now?”
Running, Hopper sent. Then more practice.
The wolf dashed away, zipping in a blur of gray and silver
off toward the road. Perrin followed. He sensed determination
from Hopper—a scent that was oddly similar to the way Tam
smelled when training the refugees to fight. That made Perrin
smile.
They ran down the road, and Perrin practiced the balance of
not being in the dream too strongly, yet being ready to solidify
his sense of self at any moment. Occasionally Hopper would
attack him, trying to throw him from the wolf dream. They
continued until Hopper—suddenly—stopped running.
Perrin took a few extra steps, surging ahead of the wolf,
before stopping. There was something in front of him. A
translucent violet wall that cut directly through the roadway. It
extended up into the sky and distantly to both the right and
the left.
“Hopper?” Perrin asked. “What is this?”
Wrongness, Hopper sent. It should not be here. The wolf
smelled angry.
Perrin stepped forward and raised a hand toward the surface,
but hesitated. It looked like glass. He’d never seen anything like
this in the wolf dream. Might it be like the bubbles of evil? He
looked up at the sky.
The wall flashed suddenly and was gone. Perrin blinked,
stumbling back. He glanced at Hopper. The wolf sat on his
haunches, staring at the place where the wall had been. Come,
Young Bull, the wolf finally sent, standing. We will practice in
another place.
He loped away. Perrin looked back down the road. Whatever
the wall had been, it had left no visible sign of its existence.
Troubled, Perrin followed after Hopper.
“Burn me, where are those archers!” Rodel Ituralde climbed up
to the top of the hillside. “I wanted them formed up on the
forward towers an hour ago to relieve the crossbowmen!”
Before him, the battle clanged and screamed and grunted and
thumped and roared. A band of Trollocs had surged across
the river, crossing on ford rafts or a crude floating bridge
fashioned from log rafts. Trollocs hated crossing water. It took
a lot to get them over.
Which was why this fortification was so useful. The hillside
sloped directly down to the only ford of reasonable size in
leagues. To the north, Trollocs boiled through a pass out of the
Blight and ran right into the River Arinelle. When they could
be forced across, they faced the hillside, which had been dug
with trenches, piled with bulwarks and set with archer towers
at the top. There was no way to reach the city of Maradon
from the Blight except by passing over this hill.
It was an ideal position for holding back a much larger force,
but even the best fortifications could be overrun, particularly
when your men were tired from weeks of fighting. The Trollocs
had crossed and fought their way up the slope under a hail of
arrows, falling into the trenches, having difficulty surmounting
the high bulwarks.
The hillside had a flat area at the top, where Ituralde had his
command position, in the upper camp. He called orders as he
looked down on the woven mass of trenches, bulwarks and
towers. The Trollocs were dying to pikemen behind one of the
bulwarks. Ituralde watched until the last Trolloc—an enormous,
ram-faced beast—roared and died with three pikes in its gut.
It looked as if another surge was coming, the Myrddraal
driving another mass of Trollocs through the pass. Enough
bodies had fallen in the river that it was clogged for the
moment, running red, the carcasses providing a footing for
those running up behind.
“Archers!” Ituralde bellowed. “Where are those bloody—”
A company of archers finally ran past, some of the reserves
he’d held back. Most of them had the coppery skin of Domani,
though there were a few stray Taraboners mixed in. They
carried a wide variety of bows: narrow Domani longbows,
serpentine Saldaean shortbows scavenged from guard posts or
villages, even a few tall Two Rivers longbows.
“Lidrin,” Ituralde called. The young, hard-eyed officer hurried
across the hillside to him. Lidrin’s brown uniform was wrinkled
and dirty at the knees, not because he was undisciplined, but
because there were times when his men needed him more
than his laundry did.

“Bed rest,” Melfane announced, taking her ear from the
wooden tube she’d placed against Elayne’s chest. The midwife
was a short, ample-cheeked woman who today wore her hair
tied back by a translucent blue scarf. Her neat dress was of
white and matching sky-blue, as if worn in defiance of the
perpetually overcast sky.
“What?” Elayne asked.
“One week,” Melfane said, wagging a thick finger at Elayne.
“You aren’t to be on your feet for one week.”
Elayne blinked, stunned, her exhaustion fleeing for the
moment. Melfane smiled cheerfully as she consigned Elayne to
this impossible punishment. Bed rest? For a week?
Birgitte stood in the doorway, Mat in the room beyond. He’d
stepped out for Melfane’s inspection, but otherwise he’d
hovered near her almost as protectively as Birgitte. You’d never
know they cared for her by the way they spoke, however—the
two of them had been sharing curses, each trying to top the
other. Elayne had learned a few new ones. Who knew that
hundred-legs did those things?
Her babes were safe, so far as Melfane could tell. That was
the important part. “Bed rest is, of course, impossible,” Elayne
said. “I have far too much to do.”
“Well, it will have to be done from bed,” Melfane replied, her
voice pleasant but completely unyielding. “Your body and your
child have undergone a great stress. They need time to
recover. I will be attending you and making certain you
maintain a strict diet.”
“But—”
“I won’t hear any excuses,” Melfane interrupted.
“I’m the Queen!” Elayne said, exasperated.
“And I’m the Queen’s midwife,” Melfane replied, still calm.
“There isn’t a soldier or attendant in this palace who won’t
help me, if I determine that your health—and that of your
child—is at risk.” She met Elayne’s eyes. “Would you like to put
my words to the test, Your Majesty?”
Elayne cringed, imagining her own Guards forbidding her to
exit her chambers. Or, worse, tying her down. She glanced at
Birgitte, but received only a satisfied nod. “It’s no more than
you deserve,” that nod seemed to say.
Elayne sat back in her bed, frustrated. It was a massive
four-poster, decorated in red and white. The room was ornate,
sparkling with various creations of crystal and ruby. It would
make a beautifully gilded prison indeed. Light! This wasn’t fair!
She did up the front of her gown.
“I see that you’re not going to try my word,” Melfane said,
standing up from the side of the bed. “You show wisdom.”
She glanced at Birgitte. “I will allow you a meeting with the
Captain-General to assess the evening’s events. But no more
than a half-hour, mind you. I won’t have you exerting
yourself!”
“But—”
Melfane wagged that finger at her again. “A half-hour, Your
Majesty. You are a woman, not a plow beast. You need rest
and care.” She turned to Birgitte. “Do not upset her unduly.”
“I wouldn’t dream of it,” Birgitte said. Her anger was finally
beginning to abate, replaced by amusement. Insufferable
woman.
Melfane withdrew to the outer chamber. Birgitte remained
where she was, regarding Elayne through narrow eyes. Some
displeasure still boiled and churned from the bond. The two
regarded one another for a long moment.
“What are we to do with you, Elayne Trakand?” Birgitte
finally asked.
“Lock me in my bedroom, it appears,” Elayne snapped.
“Not a bad solution.”
“And would you keep me here forever?” Elayne asked. “Like
Gelfina, from the stories, locked away for a thousand years in
the forgotten tower?”
Birgitte sighed. “No. But six months or so would help keep
my anxiety levels down.”
“We don’t have time for that,” Elayne replied. “We don’t have
time for much, these days. Risks must be taken.”
“Risks involving the Queen of Andor going alone to face a
mob of the Black Ajah? You’re like some blood-besotted idiot
on the battlefield, charging ahead of his comrades, seeking
death without a shield-mate to guard your back!”
Elayne blinked at the anger in the woman.
“Don’t you trust me, Elayne?” Birgitte asked. “Would you be
rid of me, if you could?”
“What? No! Of course I trust you.”
“Then why won’t you let me help you? I’m not supposed to
be here, now. I have no purpose other than what circumstance
has given me. You made me your Warder, but you won’t let
me protect you! How can I be your bodyguard if you won’t
tell me when you’re putting yourself in danger?”
Elayne felt like pulling the covers up to shield herself from
those eyes. How could Birgitte be the one who felt so hurt?
Elayne had been the one who’d been wounded! “If it means
anything,” she said, “I don’t intend to do this again.”
“No. You’ll do something else reckless.”
“I mean, I intend to be more careful. Maybe you’re right,
and the viewing isn’t a perfect guarantee. It certainly didn’t
stop me from panicking when I felt a real danger.”
“You didn’t feel a real danger when the Black Ajah locked
you up and tried to cart you away?”
Elayne hesitated. She should have been frightened that time,
but she hadn’t been. Not only because of Min’s viewing. The
Black Ajah would never have killed her, not under those
circumstances. She was too valuable.
Feeling that knife enter her side, pierce her skin, dig toward
her womb…that had been different. The terror. She could
remember the world blackening around her, her heartbeat
thudding, growing louder, like the drumbeats at the end of a
performance. The ones that came before the silence.
Birgitte regarded Elayne appraisingly. She could feel Elayne’s
emotions. She was Queen. She could not avoid risks.
But…perhaps she could rein herself in.
“Well,” Birgitte said, “did you at least discover anything?”
“I did,” Elayne said. “I—”
At that moment, a scarf-wrapped head appeared in the
doorway. Mat had his eyes closed. “You covered up?”
“Yes,” Elayne said. “And in a far more fashionable way than
you, Matrim Cauthon. That scarf looks ridiculous.”
He scowled, opening his eyes and pulling off the scarf,
revealing the angular face beneath. “
You try moving through
the city without being recognized,” he said. “Every butcher,
innkeeper and bloody backroom slipfinger seems to know what
I look like these days.”
“The Black sisters were planning to have you assassinated,”
Elayne said.
“What?” Mat asked.
Elayne nodded. “One mentioned you. It sounded like
Darkfriends had been searching for you for some time, with
the intent of killing you.”
Birgitte shrugged. “They’re Darkfriends. No doubt they want
us all dead.”
“This was different,” Elayne said. “It seemed more…intense. I
suggest keeping your wits about you the next while.”
“That’ll be a trick,” Birgitte noted. “Seeing as to how he
doesn’t have any wits in the first place.”
Mat rolled his eyes. “Did I miss you explaining what you
were doing in the flaming dungeons, sitting in a pool of your
own blood, looking for all the world like you’d seen the losing
end of a battlefield skirmish?”
“I was interrogating the Black Ajah,” Elayne said. “The details
are none of your concern. Birgitte, have you a report from the
grounds?”
“Nobody saw Mellar leave,” the Warder said. “Though we
found the secretary’s body on the ground floor, still warm.
Died from a knife to the back.”
Elayne sighed. “Shiaine?”
“Gone,” Birgitte said, “along with Marillin Gemalphin and
Falion Bhoda.”
“The Shadow couldn’t leave them in our possession,” Elayne
said with a sigh. “They know too much. They had to end up
either rescued or executed.”
“Well,” Mat said, shrugging, “you’re alive, and three of them
are dead. Seems like a reasonably good outcome.”
But the ones who escaped have a copy of your medallion,
Elayne thought. She didn’t speak it, however. She also didn’t
mention the invasion that Chesmal had spoken of. She would
talk of it with Birgitte soon, of course, but first she wanted to
consider it herself.
Mat had said the night’s events had a “reasonably good
outcome.” But the more Elayne thought about it, the more
dissatisfied she was. An invasion of Andor was coming, but she
didn’t know when. The Shadow wanted Mat dead, but as
Birgitte had pointed out, that was no surprise. In fact, the only
certain result of the evening’s adventures was the sense of
fatigue Elayne felt. That and a week confined to her rooms.
“Mat,” she said, taking off his medallion. “Here, it’s time I
gave this back. You should know that it probably saved my life
tonight.”
He walked over and took it back eagerly, then hesitated.
“Were you able to…”
“Copy it? Not perfectly. But to an extent.”
He put it back on, looking concerned. “Well, that feels good
to have back. I’ve been wanting to ask you something. Now
might not be the time.”
“Speak of it,” Elayne said, tired. “Might as well.”
“Well, it’s about the gholam…”
“The city has been emptied of most civilians,” Yoeli said as he
and Ituralde walked through Maradon’s gate. “We’re close to
the Blight; this is not the first time we’ve evacuated. My own
sister, Sigril, leads the Lastriders, who will watch from the ridge
to the southeast and send word if we should fall. She will have
sent word to our watchposts around Saldaea, requesting aid.
She will light a watchfire to alert us if they come.”
The lean-faced man looked at Ituralde, his expression grim.
“There will be few troops who could come to our aid. Queen
Tenobia took many with her when she rode to find the
Dragon Reborn.”
Ituralde nodded. He walked without a limp—Antail, one of the
Asha’man, was quite skilled with Healing. His men made a
hasty camp in the courtyard just inside the city gates. The
Trollocs had taken the tents they’d left behind, then lit them
on fire at night to illuminate them feasting on the wounded.
Ituralde had moved some of his troops into the empty
buildings, but he wanted others close to the gate in case of an
assault.
The Asha’man and Aes Sedai had worked to Heal Ituralde’s
men, but only the worst cases could get attention. Ituralde
nodded to Antail, who was working with the wounded in a
roped-off section of the square. Antail didn’t see the nod. He
concentrated, sweating, working with a Power Ituralde didn’t
want to think about.
“Are you certain you want to see them?” Yoeli asked. He
held a horseman’s long spear on his shoulder, the tip tied with
a triangular black and yellow pendant. It was called the
Traitor’s Banner by the Saldaeans here.
The city bristled with hostility, different groups of Saldaeans
regarding one another with grim expressions. Many wore strips
of black cloth and yellow cloth twisted about one another and
tied to their sword sheaths. They nodded to Yoeli.
Desya gavane cierto cuendar isain carentin, Ituralde
thought. A phrase in the Old Tongue. It meant “A resolute
heart is worth ten arguments.” He could guess what that
banner meant. Sometimes a man knew what he must do,
though it sounded wrong.
The two of them walked for a time through the streets.
Maradon was like most Borderland cities: straight walls, square
buildings, narrow streets. The houses looked like fortressed
keeps, with small windows and sturdy doors. The streets
wound in odd ways, and there were no thatched roofs—only
slate shingles, fireproof. The dried blood at several key
intersections was difficult to make out against the dark stone,
but Ituralde knew what to look for. Yoeli’s rescue of his troops
had come after fighting among the Saldaeans.
They reached a nondescript building. There would be no way
for an outsider to know that this particular dwelling belonged
to Vram Torkumen, distant cousin to the Queen, appointed lord
of the city in her absence. The soldiers at the door wore
yellow and black. They saluted Yoeli.
Inside, Ituralde and Yoeli entered a narrow staircase and
climbed three flights of stairs. There were soldiers in nearly
every room. On the top floor, four men wearing the Traitor’s
Banner guarded a large, gold-inlaid door. The hallway was
dark: narrow windows, a rug of black, green and red.
“Anything to report, Tarran?” Yoeli asked.
“Not a thing, sir,” the man said with a salute. He wore long
mustaches and had the bowed legs of a man very comfortable
in the saddle.
Yoeli nodded. “Thank you, Tarran. For all you do.”
“I stand with you, sir. And will at the end.”
“May you keep your eyes northward, but your heart
southward, my friend,” Yoeli said, taking a deep breath and
pushing open the door. Ituralde followed.
Inside the room, a Saldaean man in a rich red robe sat
beside a hearth, sipping a cup of wine. A woman in a fine
dress did needlework in the chair across from him. Neither
looked up.
“Lord Torkumen,” Yoeli said. “This is Rodel Ituralde, leader of
the Domani army.”
The man at the hearth sighed over his cup of wine. “You do
not knock, you do not wait for me to address you first, you
come during an hour when I have spoken of my need for
quiet contemplation.”
“Really, Vram,” the woman said, “you expect manners from
this man? Now?”
Yoeli quietly rested his hand on the hilt of his sword. The
room held a jumble of furniture: a bed on the side of the
room that obviously didn’t belong there, a few trunks and
standing wardrobes.
“So,” Vram said, “Rodel Ituralde. You’re one of the great
captains. I realize it might be insulting to ask, but I must
observe formalities. You realize that by bringing troops onto our
soil, you have risked a war?”
“I serve the Dragon Reborn,” Ituralde said. “Tarmon Gai’don
comes, and all previous allegiances, boundaries, and laws are
subject to the Dragon’s will.”
Vram clicked his tongue. “Dragonsworn. I had reports, of
course—and those men you employ seemed an obvious hint.
But it is still so strange to hear. Do you not realize how
utterly foolish you sound?”
Ituralde met the man’s eyes. He hadn’t considered himself
Dragonsworn, but there was no use calling a horse a rock and
expecting everyone else to agree. “Don’t you care about the
invading Trollocs?”
“There have been Trollocs before,” Vram said. “There have
always been Trollocs.”
“The Queen—” Yoeli said.
“The Queen,” Vram interrupted, “will soon return from her
expedition to unmask and capture this false Dragon. Once that
happens, she will see you executed, traitor. You, Rodel Ituralde,
will likely be spared because of your station, but I should not
like to be your family when they receive the ransom demand. I
hope that you have wealth to accompany your reputation.
Otherwise, you shall likely spend many of the next years as a
general to nothing more than the rats of your cell.”
“I see,” Ituralde said. “When did you turn to the Shadow?”
Vram’s eyes opened wide, and he stood. “You dare name me
Darkfriend?”
“I’ve known some Saldaeans in my time,” Ituralde said. “I’ve
called some friends; I’ve fought against others. But never have
I known one who would watch men fight Shadowspawn and
not offer to help.”
“If I had a sword…” Vram said.
“May you burn, Vram Torkumen,” Ituralde said. “I came here
to tell you that, on behalf of the men I lost.”
The man seemed shocked as Ituralde turned to go. Yoeli
joined him, pulling the door closed.
“You disagree with my accusation?” Ituralde asked, joining the
traitor as they returned to the stairs.
“I honestly can’t decide if he’s a fool or a Darkfriend,” Yoeli
said. “He’d have to be one or the other to not put together
the truth from the winter, those clouds and the rumors that
al’Thor has conquered half the world.”
“Then you have nothing to fear,” Ituralde said. “You won’t be
executed.”
“I killed my countrymen,” Yoeli said, “staged a revolt against
my Queen’s appointed leader, and seized command of the city,
though I’ve not a drop of noble blood.”
“That’ll change the moment Tenobia returns, I warrant,”
Ituralde said. “You’ve earned yourself a title for certain.”
Yoeli stopped in the dark stairwell, lit only from above and
below. “I see that you do not understand. I have betrayed my
oaths and killed friends. I will demand execution, as is my
right.”
Ituralde felt a chill. Bloody Borderlanders, he thought. “Swear
yourself to the Dragon. He supersedes all oaths. Do not waste
your life. Fight beside me at the Last Battle.”
“I will not hide behind excuses, Lord Ituralde,” the man said,
continuing down the steps. “No more than I could watch your
men die. Come. Let us see to the housing of those Asha’man.
I would like very much to see these ‘gateways’ you speak of. If
we could use them to send messages out and bring supplies
in, this could be a very interesting siege indeed.”
Ituralde sighed, but followed. They didn’t speak of fleeing by
way of the gateways. Yoeli wouldn’t abandon his city. And, he
realized, Ituralde wouldn’t abandon Yoeli and his men. Not after
what they’d gone through to rescue him.
This was as good a place as any to make a stand. Better
than many a situation he’d been in lately, that was for certain.
Perrin entered their tent to find Faile brushing her hair. She
was beautiful. Each day, he still felt a sense of wonder that
she was really back.
She turned to him and smiled in satisfaction. She was using
the new silver comb he’d left on her pillow—something he’d
traded for from Gaul, who had found it in Malden. If this
shanna’har was important to her, then Perrin intended to treat
it the same way.
“The messengers have returned,” Perrin said, closing the flaps
to the tent. “The Whitecloaks have chosen a battlefield. Light,
Faile. They’re going to force me to wipe them out.”
“I don’t see the trouble with that,” she said. “We’ll win.”
“Probably,” Perrin said, sitting down on the pillows beside
their sleeping pallet. “But despite the Asha’man doing most of
the work at first, we’ll have to move in to fight. That means
we’ll lose people. Good men we need at the Last Battle.” He
forced himself to relax the fists that he’d clenched. “The Light
burn those Whitecloaks for what they’ve done, and for what
they’re doing.”
“Then it’s a welcome opportunity to defeat them.”
Perrin grunted a reply, and didn’t explain the depth of
frustration he felt. He would lose that fight against the
Whitecloaks, no matter what happened. Men would die on both
sides. Men they needed.
The lightning flashed outside, casting shadows on the canvas
ceiling. Faile went over to their trunk, getting out a sleeping
shift for herself and setting aside a robe for him. Faile thought
a lord should have a robe handy in case he was needed at
night. She’d been correct a couple of times so far.
She moved past him, smelling worried, though her expression
was pleasant. He had expended all options for a peaceful
resolution with the Whitecloaks. It looked like, want it or not,
killing would be his lot again very soon.
He stripped to his smallclothes and lay down, then started
drifting off before Faile had finished changing.
He entered the wolf dream beneath the great sword impaling
the ground. In the distance, he could make out the hill that
Gaul had named a “fine watchpoint.” The campsite was
supplied from behind by a stream.
Perrin turned and sped toward the Whitecloak camp. They
sat like a dam in a river, stopping him from continuing
onward.
“Hopper?” he called, looking around the Whitecloak camp, still
tents standing on an open field. There was no response, so
Perrin searched the camp a while longer. Balwer had not
recognized the seal Perrin had described. Who led these
Whitecloaks?
An hour or so later, Perrin had come to no conclusion about
that. However, he was fairly certain which tents they kept their
supplies in; those might not be as well guarded as the
prisoners, and—with gateways—he might be able to burn their
supplies.
Maybe. Their Lord Captain Commander’s letters were filled
with phrases like: “I am giving your people the benefit of
believing they knew not of your nature” and “My patience for
your delays wears thin” and “There are only two options.
Surrender yourself for proper trial, or bring your army to
suffer the Light’s judgment.”
There was a strange sense of honor to this man, one Perrin
had seen hinted at when he’d met the man, but could sense
even more through the letters. But who was he? He signed
each letter only “Lord Captain Commander of the Children of
the Light.”
Perrin moved out onto the roadway. Where was Hopper?
Perrin took off at a brisk run. After a few moments, he moved
off onto the grass. The earth was so soft, each step seemed to
spring his foot back up into the air.
He reached out and thought he sensed something to the
south. He ran toward it; he wished to go faster, so he did.
Trees and hills zipped past.
The wolves were aware of him. It was Oak Dancer’s pack,
with Boundless, Sparks, Morninglight, and others. Perrin could
feel them sending to one another, distant whispers of images
and scent. Perrin moved faster, feeling the wind become a roar
around him.
The wolves began to move away farther south. Wait! he
sent. I must meet with you!
They returned only amusement. Suddenly, they were heading
east, and he pulled to a stop, then turned. He ran as quickly
as he knew how, but when he got near, they were suddenly
elsewhere. They’d shifted, vanishing from the south and
appearing north of him.
Perrin growled, and suddenly he was on all fours. His fur
blew, his mouth open as he dashed to the north, drinking in
the hissing wind. But the wolves stayed ahead, distant.
He howled. They sent back taunts.
He pushed himself faster, leaping from hilltop to hilltop,
bounding over trees, the ground a blur. In moments, the
Mountains of Mist sprang up to his left, and he passed along
them in a rush.
The wolves turned east. Why couldn’t he catch them? He
could smell them ahead. Young Bull howled at them, but got
no response.
Do not come too strongly, Young Bull.
Young Bull pulled to a halt and the world lurched around
him. The main pack continued on to the east, but Hopper sat
on his haunches beside a large curving stream. Young Bull had
been here before; it was near the den of his sires. He had
traveled along the river itself on the back of one of the
humans’ floating trees. He—
No…no…remember Faile!
His fur became clothing and he found himself on hands and
knees. He glared at Hopper. “Why did you run away?” Perrin
demanded.
You wish to learn, Hopper sent. You grow more skilled.
Faster. You stretch your legs and run. This is good.
Perrin looked back the way he had come, thinking of his
speed. He’d bounded from hilltop to hilltop. It had been
wonderful. “But I had to become the wolf to do that,” Perrin
said. “And that threatened to make me here ‘too strongly.’
What use is training if it makes me do things you’ve
forbidden?”
You are quick to blame, Young Bull. A young wolf howling
and yapping outside the den, making a racket. This is not a
thing of wolves.
Hopper was gone in an eyeblink.
Perrin growled, looking eastward, where he sensed the wolves.
He took off after them, going more cautiously. He couldn’t
afford to let the wolf consume him. He’d end up like Noam,
trapped in a cage, his humanity gone. Why would Hopper
encourage him to that?
This is not a thing of wolves. Had he meant the
accusations, or had he meant what was happening to Perrin?
The others all knew to end the hunt, Young Bull, Hopper
sent from a distance. Only you had to be stopped.
Perrin froze, pulling to a halt on the bank of the river. The
hunt for the white stag. Hopper was there, suddenly, beside
the river with him.
“This started when I began to sense the wolves,” Perrin sent.
“The first time I lost control of myself was with those
Whitecloaks.”
Hopper lay down, resting his head on his paws. You often
are here too strongly, the wolf sent. It is what you do.
Hopper had told him that, off and on, since he’d known the
wolf and the wolf dream. But suddenly, Perrin saw a new
meaning to it. It was about coming to the wolf dream, but it
was also about Perrin himself.
He’d begun to blame the wolves for what he did, the way he
was when fighting, the way he’d become when searching for
Faile. But were the wolves the cause of that? Or was it some
part of him? Was it possible that that was what caused him to
become a wolfbrother in the first place?
“Is it possible,” Perrin said, “to run on four legs, but not
come here too strongly?”
Of course it is, Hopper sent, laughing after the way of
wolves—as if what Perrin had discovered was the most obvious
thing in the world. Maybe it was.
Perhaps he wasn’t like the wolves because he was a
wolfbrother. Perhaps he was a wolfbrother because he was like
the wolves. He didn’t need to control them. He needed to
control himself.
“The pack,” Perrin said. “How do I catch them? Move more
quickly?”
That is one way. Another is to be where you want.
Perrin frowned. Then he closed his eyes and used the
direction the wolves were running to guess where they would
be. Something shifted.
When he opened his eyes, he was standing on a sandy
hillside, tufts of long-bladed grass peeking out of the soil. An
enormous mountain with a broken tip—shattered as if it had
been slapped by the hand of a giant—rose to his right.
A pack of wolves burst out of the forest. Many of them were
laughing. Young Bull, hunting when he should seek the end!
Young Bull, seeking the end when he should enjoy the hunt!
He smiled, trying to feel good natured about the laughter,
though in truth he felt much as he had on the day that his
cousin Wil had planted a bucket of wet feathers to drop on
Perrin.
Something fluttered in the air. A chicken feather. Wet around
the edges. Perrin started, realizing that they were spread
around him on the ground. As he blinked, they vanished. The
wolves smelled greatly amused, sending images of Young Bull
dusted with feathers.
Get lost in dreams here, Young Bull, Hopper sent, and
those dreams become this dream.
Perrin scratched his beard, fighting down his embarrassment.
He’d experienced before the unpredictable nature of the wolf
dream. “Hopper,” he said, turning to the wolf. “How much
could I change about my surroundings, if I wanted?”
If you wanted? Hopper said. It’s not about what you want,
Young Bull. It’s about what you need. What you know.
Perrin frowned. Sometimes the wolf’s meanings still confused
him.
Suddenly, the other wolves in the group turned—as if
one—and looked to the southwest. They vanished.
They went here. Hopper sent an image of a distant wooded
hollow. The wolf prepared to follow.
“Hopper!” Perrin said, stepping forward. “How did you know?
Where they went? Did they tell you?”
No. But I can follow.
“How?” Perrin said.
It is a thing I’ve always known, Hopper sent. Like
walking. Or jumping.
“Yes, but how?”
The wolf smelled confused. It is a scent, he finally replied,
though “scent” was much more complex than that. It was a
feeling, an impression, and a smell all in one.
“Go somewhere,” Perrin said. “Let me try to follow.”
Hopper vanished. Perrin walked up to where the wolf had
been.
Smell it, Hopper sent distantly. He was near enough to give
a sending. By reflex, Perrin reached out. He found dozens of
wolves. In fact, he was amazed by how many of them were
here, on the slopes of Dragonmount. Perrin had never felt so
many gathered in one place before. Why were they here? And
did the sky look more stormy in this place than it had in
other areas of the wolf dream?
He couldn’t sense Hopper; the wolf had closed himself off,
somehow, making Perrin unable to place where he was. Perrin
settled down. Smell it
, Hopper had sent. Smell it how? Perrin
closed his eyes and let his nose carry the scents of the area to
him. Pine cones and sap, quills and leaves, leatherleaf and
hemlock.
And…something else. Yes, he could smell something. A distant,
lingering scent that seemed out of place. Many of the scents
were the same—the same fecund sense of nature, the same
wealth of trees. But those were mixed with the scents of moss
and of wet stone. The air was different. Pollen and flowers.
Perrin squeezed his eyes tight, breathing in deeply. Somehow,
he built a picture in his mind from those scents. The process
was not unlike the way a wolf sending translated into words.
There, he thought. Something shifted.
He opened his eyes. He was sitting on a stone outcropping
amid pines; he was on the side of Dragonmount, several
hours’ hike up from where he had been. The stone
outcropping was covered in lichen, and it jutted out over the
trees spreading below. A patch of violet springbreath grew here,
where sunlight could reach the blossoms. It was good to see
flowers that weren’t wilted or dying, if only in the wolf dream.
Come, Hopper sent. Follow.
And he was gone.
Perrin closed his eyes, breathing in. The process was easier
this time. Oak and grass, mud and humidity. It seemed each
place had its own specific scent.
Perrin shifted, then opened his eyes. He crouched in a field
near the Jehannah Road. This was where Oak Dancer’s pack
had gone earlier, and Hopper moved about the meadow,
smelling curious. The pack had moved on, but they were still
close.
“Can I always do that?” Perrin asked Hopper. “Smell where a
wolf went in the dream?”
Anyone can, Hopper said. If they can smell as a wolf
does. He grinned.
Perrin nodded thoughtfully.
Hopper loped back across the meadow toward him. We must
practice, Young Bull. You are still a cub with short legs
and soft fur. We—
Hopper froze suddenly.
“What?” Perrin asked.
A wolf suddenly howled in pain. Perrin spun. It was
Morninglight. The howl cut off, and the wolf’s mind winked out,
vanishing.
Hopper growled, his scents panicked, angry, and sorrowful.
“What was that?” Perrin demanded.
We are hunted. Go, Young Bull! We must go.
The minds of the other members of the pack leaped away.
Perrin growled. When a wolf died in the wolf dream, it was
forever. No rebirth, no running with nose to the wind. Only
one thing hunted the spirits of the wolves.
Slayer.
Young Bull! Hopper sent. We must go!
Perrin continued to growl. Morninglight had sent one last
burst of surprise and pain, her last vision of the world. Perrin
formed an image from that jumble. Then closed his eyes.
Young Bull! No! He—
Shift. Perrin snapped his eyes open to find himself in a small
glade near where—in the real world—his people made camp. A
muscular, tanned man with dark hair and blue eyes squatted
in the center of the glade, a wolf’s corpse at his feet. Slayer
was a thick-armed man, and his scent was faintly inhuman, like
a man mixed with stone. He wore dark clothing; leather and
black wool. As Perrin watched, Slayer began to skin the corpse.
Perrin charged forward. Slayer looked up in surprise. He
resembled Lan in an almost eerie fashion, his hard face all
angles and sharp lines. Perrin roared, hammer suddenly in his
hands.
Slayer vanished in a blink of an eye, and Perrin’s hammer
passed through empty air. Perrin breathed deeply. The scents
were there! Brine, and wood, wet with water. Seagulls and their
droppings. Perrin used his newfound skill to hurl himself at
that distant location.
Shift.
Perrin appeared on an empty dock in a city he didn’t
recognize. Slayer stood nearby, inspecting his bow.
Perrin attacked. Slayer brought his head up, eyes widening,
his scent growing amazed. He raised the bow to block, but
Perrin’s swing shattered it.
With a roar, Perrin pulled his weapon back and swung again,
this time for Slayer’s head. Oddly, Slayer smiled, dark eyes
glittering with amusement. He smelled eager, suddenly. Eager to
kill. A sword appeared in his raised hand, and he twisted it to
block Perrin’s blow.
The hammer bounced off too hard, as if it had hit stone.
Perrin stumbled, and Slayer reached out, placing a hand
against Perrin’s shoulder. He shoved.
His strength was immense. The shove tossed Perrin
backward to the dock, but the wood disappeared as he hit.
Perrin passed through empty air and splashed into the water
beneath. His bellow became a gurgle; dark liquid surrounded
him.
He struggled to swim upward, dropping his hammer, but
found that the surface inexplicably became ice. Ropes snaked
up from the depths, whipping up around Perrin’s arms,
yanking him downward. Through the frozen surface above, he
could see a shadow moving. Slayer, raising his reformed bow.
The ice vanished and the water parted. Water streamed off
Perrin, and he found himself staring up at an arrow pointed
directly at his heart.
Slayer released.
Perrin willed himself away.
Shift. He gasped, hitting the stone outcropping where he had
been with Hopper. Perrin fell to his knees, seawater streaming
from his body. He sputtered, wiping his face, heart pounding.
Hopper appeared beside him, panting, his scent angry.
Foolish cub! Stupid cub! Chase down a lion when you’re
barely weaned?
Perrin shivered and sat up. Would Slayer follow? Could he?
As minutes stretched and nobody appeared, Perrin began to
relax. The exchange with Slayer had happened so quickly that
it felt like a blur. That strength…it was more than any man
could have. And the ice, the ropes…
“He changed things,” Perrin said. “Made the dock vanish
beneath me, created ropes to bind me, pushed the water back
so that he could get a clear shot at me.”
He is a lion. He kills. Dangerous.
“I need to learn. I must face him, Hopper.”
You are too young. These things are beyond you.
“Too young?” Perrin said, standing. “Hopper, the Last Hunt is
nearly upon us!”
Hopper lay down, head on paws.
“You always tell me that I’m too young,” Perrin said. “Or that
I don’t know what I’m doing. Well, what is the point of
teaching me, if not to show me how to fight men like Slayer?”
We will see, Hopper sent. For tonight, you will go. We are
done.
Perrin sensed a mournful cast to the sending, and also a
finality. Tonight, Oak Dancer’s pack and Hopper would grieve
for Morninglight.
Sighing, Perrin sat with his legs crossed. He concentrated, and
managed to imitate the things that Hopper had done in tossing
him from the dream.
It faded around him.
He woke on the pallet in his darkened tent, Faile snuggled up
beside him.
Perrin lay for a time, staring up at the canvas. The darkness
reminded him of the tempestuous sky in the wolf dream. Sleep
seemed as far off as Caemlyn. Eventually he rose—carefully
extricating himself from Faile—and pulled on his trousers and
shirt.
The camp was dark outside, but there was enough light for
his eyes. He nodded to Kenly Maerin and Jaim Dawtry, the
Two Rivers men who guarded his tent tonight.
“What’s the time?” he asked one of them.
“After midnight, Lord Perrin,” Jaim said.
Perrin grunted. Distant lightning lit the landscape. He walked
off, and the men started to follow. “I’ll be fine without guards,”
he told them. “Watch over my tent—Lady Faile still sleeps.”
His tent was near the edge of camp. He liked that; it gave
him a little more sense of seclusion, nestled near the hillside at
the western side of the camp. Though it was late, he passed
Gaul sharpening his spear near a fallen log. The tall Stone Dog
stood up and began to follow, and Perrin didn’t dismiss him.
Gaul felt he hadn’t been fulfilling his self-appointed duty of
watching after Perrin lately, and had stepped up his efforts.
Perrin thought he really just wanted an excuse to stay away
from his own tent and the pair of gai’shain women who had
taken up residence there.
Gaul kept his distance, and Perrin was glad. Was this how all
leaders felt? No wonder so many nations ended up at war
with one another—their leaders never had any time to think by
themselves, and probably attacked to get people to stop
pestering them!
A short distance away, he entered a stand of trees with a
small pile of logs. Denton—his serving man until they got
Lamgwin back—had frowned when Perrin had asked for them.
Once a minor lord of Cairhien, Denton had refused to return
to his station. He thought of himself as a servant now, and
would not let anyone convince him otherwise.
There was an axe. Not the deadly half-moon blade he had
once carried to battle, but a sturdy woodsman’s axe with a
fine steel head and a haft smoothed by the sweaty hands of
workers. Perrin rolled up his sleeves, then spat on his hands
and picked up the axe. It felt good to hold the worked wood
in his hands. He raised it to his shoulder, stood the first log in
front of him, then stepped back and swung.
He hit the log straight on, splinters flipping into the dark
night air, the log falling into two pieces. He split one of the
halves next. Gaul took a seat beside a tree, getting out a spear
and continuing to sharpen its head. The rasping of metal
against metal accompanied Perrin’s thunk of axe against wood.
It felt good. Why was it that his mind worked so much
better when he was doing something? Loial spoke much of
sitting and thinking. Perrin didn’t think he himself could figure
anything out that way.
He split another log, the axe cutting clear. Was it really true?
Could his own nature be to blame for the way he acted, not
the wolves? He’d never acted like that back in the Two Rivers.
He split another log. I always was good at concentrating
my attention. That was part of what had impressed Master
Luhhan. Give Perrin a project, and he’d keep working on it
until he was done.
He split the halves of that log.
Maybe the changes in him were a result of encountering the
outside world. He’d blamed the wolves for many things, and he
had placed unnatural demands on Hopper. Wolves weren’t
stupid or simple, but they did not care about things that
humans did. It must have been very hard for Hopper to teach
in a way that Perrin would understand.
What did the wolf owe him? Hopper had died during that
fateful night, so long ago. The night when Perrin had first
killed a man, the night Perrin had first lost control of himself
in a battle. Hopper didn’t owe Perrin anything, but he had
saved Perrin on several occasions—in fact, Perrin realized that
Hopper’s intervention had helped to keep him from losing
himself as a wolf.
He swung at a log, a glancing blow that knocked it to the
side. He repositioned and continued, Gaul’s quiet sharpening
soothing him. He split it.
Perrin grew caught up in what he was doing, maybe too
much. That was true.
But at the same time, if a man wanted to get anything done,
he had to work on one project until it was complete. Perrin
had known men who never seemed to finish anything, and
their farms were a mess. He couldn’t live like that.
There had to be a balance. Perrin had claimed he had been
pulled into a world filled with problems much larger than he
was. He had claimed he was a simple man.
What if he was wrong? What if he was a complex man who
had once happened to live a simple life? After all, if he was so
simple, why had he fallen in love with such a complicated
woman?
The split logs were piling up. Perrin bent down, gathering up
quarters, their grain rough against his fingers. Callused fingers;
he would never be a lord like those milk-fed creatures from
Cairhien. But there were other kinds of lords, men like Faile’s
own father. Or men like Lan, who seemed more weapon than
man.
Perrin stacked the wood. He enjoyed leading the wolves in
his dream, but wolves didn’t expect you to protect them, or to
provide for them, or to make laws for them. They didn’t cry
to you when their loved ones died beneath your command.
It wasn’t the leadership that worried him. It was all the things
that came with it.
He could smell Elyas approaching. With his loamy, natural
earthen scent he smelled like a wolf. Almost.
“You’re up late,” Elyas said, stepping up. Perrin heard Gaul
rustling, slipping his spear back into its place on his bowcase,
then withdrawing with the silence of a sparrow streaking off
into the sky. He would stay close, but would not listen in.
Perrin looked up at the dark sky, resting the axe on his
shoulder. “Sometimes I feel more awake at night than during
the day.”
Elyas smiled. Perrin didn’t see it, but he could smell the
amusement.
“Did you ever try to avoid it, Elyas?” Perrin asked. “Ignore
their voices, pretend that nothing about you had changed?”
“I did,” Elyas said. He had a soft low voice, one that
somehow suggested the earth in motion. Distant rumbles. “I
wanted to, but then the Aes Sedai wanted to gentle me. I had
to flee.”
“Do you miss your old life?”
Elyas shrugged—Perrin could hear the motion, the clothing
scraping against itself. “No Warder wants to abandon his duty.
Sometimes, other things are more important. Or…well, maybe
they are just more demanding. I don’t regret my choices.”
“I can’t leave, Elyas. I won’t
.”
“I left my life for the wolves. That doesn’t mean you have
to.”
“Noam had to,” Perrin said.
“Did he have to?” Elyas said.
“It consumed him. He stopped being human.”
He caught a scent of worry. Elyas had no answers.
“Do you ever visit wolves in your dreams, Elyas?” Perrin
asked. “A place where dead wolves run and live again?”
Elyas turned, eyeing him. “That place is dangerous, Perrin. It’s
another world, although tied to this one somehow. Legends say
the Aes Sedai of old could go there.”
“And other people, too,” Perrin said, thinking of Slayer.
“Be careful in the dream. I stay away from it.” His scent was
wary.
“Do you ever have trouble?” Perrin asked. “Separating
yourself from the wolf?”
“I used to.”
“But not any longer?”
“I found a balance,” Elyas said.
“How?”
The older man fell still for a moment. “I wish I knew. It was
just something I learned, Perrin. Something you’ll have to
learn.”
Or end up like Noam. Perrin met Elyas’ golden eyes, then
nodded. “Thank you.”
“For the advice?”
“No,” Perrin said. “For coming back. For showing me that
one of us, at least, can live with the wolves and not lose
himself.”
“It’s nothing,” Elyas said. “I had forgotten that it could be
nice to be around people for a change. I don’t know how long
I can stay, though. The Last Hunt is almost here.”
Perrin looked up at the sky again. “That it is. Pass the word
on to Tam and the others for me. I’ve made my decision. The
Whitecloaks have picked a place to fight. I’ve decided to go
ahead and meet them tomorrow.”
“All right,” Elyas said. “You don’t smell like you want to do it,
though.”
“It needs to be done,” Perrin said. “And that’s that.”
Everyone wanted him to be a lord. Well, this was the sort of
thing lords did. Made decisions that nobody wanted to make.
It would still sicken him to give the order. He’d seen a vision
of those wolves running sheep toward a beast. It seemed to
him that maybe that was what he was doing, running the
Whitecloaks toward destruction. They certainly wore the color of
sheep’s wool.
But what to make of the vision of Faile and the others,
approaching a cliff? Elyas moved off, leaving Perrin with the
axe still on his shoulder. He felt as if he hadn’t been chopping
logs, but bodies.

“These Whitecloaks are a tight-lipped group, my Lady,” Lacile
said with a smug smile, “but they’re still men. Men who
haven’t seen a woman in a while, I think. That always makes
them lose what few brains they have.”
Faile walked the horselines, the sky dark, lantern held before
her. Perrin was asleep; he’d retired early these last few days,
seeking the wolf dream. The Whitecloaks had reluctantly agreed
to delay the trial, but Perrin still should have been preparing
his words to speak there. He grumbled that he already knew
what he was going to say. Knowing him, he’d just tell Morgase
what had happened, straightforward as usual.
Lacile and Selande walked on either side of Faile. Other
members of Cha Faile walked behind, keeping careful watch
for anyone close enough to be within earshot.
“I think the Whitecloaks knew we were there to spy,” Selande
said. The short, pale woman walked with hand on her sword.
The stance didn’t seem as awkward as it once had; Selande
had taken her sword training seriously.
“No, I doubt they guessed,” Lacile replied. She still wore a
simple tan blouse and darker brown skirt. Selande had
changed back to breeches and sword immediately upon
returning—she still bore a cut on her arm from where that
sword had tried to kill her—but Lacile seemed to be savoring
her time in the skirt.
“They barely said anything of use,” Selande said.
“Yes,” Lacile replied, “but I think they’re merely in that habit.
Our excuse of checking on Maighdin and the others was a
reasonable one, my Lady. We were able to deliver your note,
then do a little chatting with the men. I teased out enough to
be of some use.”
Faile raised an eyebrow, though Lacile fell quiet as they
passed a groom working late, brushing down one of the
horses.
“The Whitecloaks respect Galad,” Lacile said once out of the
groom’s earshot. “Though some grumble about the things he’s
been telling them.”
“What things?” Faile asked.
“He wants them to ally with the Aes Sedai for the Last
Battle,” Lacile explained.
“Anyone could have told you they would dislike that idea,”
Selande said. “They’re Whitecloaks!”
“Yes,” Faile said, “but it means that this Galad is more
reasonable than his men. A useful tip, Lacile.”
The young woman swelled, brushing her short hair back in a
modest gesture, throwing back the red ribbons she had tied
there. She’d taken to wearing twice as many now, since her
Shaido captivity.
Up ahead, a lanky figure stepped between two of the horses.
He had a thick mustache, Taraboner style, and though he was
young, he had the air of one who had seen much in his life.
Dannil Lewin, the man in charge of the Two Rivers men now
that Tam had mysteriously decided to depart. Light send that
Tam was safe, wherever he’d gone.
“Why, Dannil,” Faile said, “what an odd coincidence to see
you here.”
“Coincidence?” he asked, scratching at his head. He held his
bow in one hand, staff-like, though he kept glancing at it,
wary. A lot of people did that with their weapons now. “You
asked me to come here.”
“It must be a coincidence nonetheless,” Faile said, “in case
anyone asks. Particularly if that somebody is my husband.”
“I don’t like keeping things from Lord Perrin,” Dannil said,
falling into step with her.
“And you’d prefer to risk letting him be beheaded by a
group of rabid Whitecloaks?”
“No. None of the men do.”
“You’ve done what I asked, then?”
Dannil nodded. “I spoke to Grady and Neald. Lord Perrin
has already ordered them to stay nearby, but we talked. Grady
said he’d have weaves of Air ready, and will grab Lord Perrin
and get out if things get ugly, Neald covering the retreat. I’ve
talked to the men from the Two Rivers. A group of archers in
the trees will be ready to provide a distraction.”
Faile nodded. Neither Asha’man had been wounded in this
bubble of evil, fortunately. Each had been carrying a knife, but
reports said they’d looked at the floating weapons, then
nonchalantly waved hands and blasted them from the air.
When messengers with news of Faile’s earth-throwing trick had
reached the section of camp the Asha’man had been in, they’d
found this area in much less chaos, Grady and Neald striding
through camp and felling weapons wherever they saw them.
Part of the reason for the delay before the trial was to take
care of Healing. But another large reason was because Perrin
wanted to give time to the camp’s smiths and craftsmen to
make replacement weapons for those who had lost theirs, just
in case the trial turned to a battle. And Faile was increasingly
certain that it would.
“Lord Perrin won’t like being pulled away from fighting,”
Dannil said. “Not one bit.”
“That tent could turn into a death trap,” Faile said. “Perrin
can lead the battle if he wants, but from a safer position. You
will get him out.”
Dannil sighed, but nodded. “Yes, my Lady.”
Perrin was learning not to fear Young Bull.
Step by step, he learned balance. The wolf when the wolf
was needed; the man when the man was needed. He let
himself be drawn into the hunt, but kept Faile—his home—in
his mind. He walked the edge of the sword, but each step
made him more confident.
Today, he hunted Hopper, wily and experienced prey. But
Young Bull was quick to learn, and having the mind of a man
gave him advantages. He could think like something, or
someone, that he was not.
Was this how Noam had begun? Where would this path of
understanding lead? There was a secret to this, a secret Young
Bull had to find for himself.
He could not fail. He had to learn. It seemed
that—somehow—the more confident he became in the wolf
dream, the more comfortable he became with himself in the
waking world.
Young Bull charged through an unfamiliar forest. No, a
jungle, with hanging vines and wide-fronded ferns. The
underbrush was so thick that a rat would have trouble
squeezing through. But Young Bull demanded that the world
open before him. Vines pulled back. Shrubs bent. Ferns
retracted, like mothers pulling their children out of the way of
a galloping horse.
He caught glimpses of Hopper bounding ahead. His prey
vanished. Young Bull didn’t break pace, charging through that
spot and catching the scent of Hopper’s destination. Young Bull
shifted onto an open plain with no trees and an unfamiliar
scrub patching the ground. His prey was a series of streaking
blurs in the distance. Young Bull followed, each bound carrying
him hundreds of paces.
Within seconds, they approached an enormous plateau. His
prey ran directly up the side of the stone shelf. Young Bull
followed, ignoring what was “right.” He ran with the ground far
below at his back, nose toward that boiling sea of black clouds.
He leaped over clefts in the rock, ricocheting between two sides
of a rift, cresting the top of the plateau.
Hopper attacked. Young Bull was ready. He rolled, coming up
on all fours as his prey leaped over his head, passed over the
cliff’s edge, but then vanished in a flash and was back standing
on the lip of the cliff.
Young Bull became Perrin holding a hammer made of soft
wood. Such things were possible in the wolf dream; if the
hammer hit, it would not harm.
Perrin swung, the air cracking with the sudden speed of his
motion. But Hopper was equally fast, dodging out of the way.
He rolled, then leaped at Perrin’s back, fangs glistening. Perrin
growled and shifted so that he was standing a few feet from
where he had been. Hopper’s jaws snapped open air, and
Perrin swung his hammer again.
Hopper was suddenly shrouded in a deep mist. Perrin’s
hammer slammed down through it, hitting the ground. It
bounced off. He cursed, spinning. In the fog, he couldn’t see,
couldn’t catch Hopper’s scent.
A shadow moved in the mist and Perrin lunged, but it was
only a pattern in the air. He spun and found shadows moving
all around him. The shapes of wolves, men, and other
creatures he couldn’t see.
Make the world yours, Young Bull, Hopper sent.
Perrin focused, thinking of dry air. Of the musty scent of
dust. That was what the air should be like, in an arid
landscape like this.
No. It wasn’t what the air should be like. It was how the air
was
! His mind, his will, his feelings slammed against something
else. He pushed through.
The mists vanished, evaporating in the heat. Hopper sat on
his haunches a short distance away. Good, the wolf sent. You
learn. He glanced sideways, looking toward the north, seeming
distracted by something. Then he was gone.
Perrin caught his scent and followed to the Jehannah Road.
Hopper dashed along outside the strange violet dome. They
jumped back to this place frequently to see if the dome ever
vanished. So far, it had not.
Perrin continued the chase. Was the dome meant to trap
wolves inside? But if that was the case, why had Slayer not
sprung his trap at Dragonmount, where so many wolves had
for some reason gathered?
Perhaps the dome had another purpose. Perrin memorized a
few notable rock formations along the perimeter of the dome,
then followed Hopper to a low shelf of rock. The wolf leaped
from it, vanishing in midair, and Perrin followed.
He caught the scent of Hopper’s destination in midjump, then
took himself there, still in motion. He appeared about two feet
above a shimmering blue expanse. Stunned, he fell and
splashed into the water.
He swam frantically, dropping his hammer. Hopper stood on
top of the water, bearing a wolfish expression of disapproval.
Not good, the wolf added. You still need to learn.
Perrin sputtered.
The sea grew tempestuous, but Hopper sat placidly upon the
rolling waves. Again he glanced northward, but then turned
back to Perrin. Water troubles you, Young Bull.
“I was just surprised,” Perrin said, swimming hard.
Why?
“Because I didn’t expect this!”
Why expect? Hopper sent. When you follow another, you
could end up anywhere.
“I know.” Perrin spat out a mouthful of water. He gritted his
teeth, then imagined himself standing on the water like Hopper.
Blessedly, he rose out of the sea to stand atop its surface. It
was a strange sensation, the sea undulating beneath him.
You will not defeat Slayer like this, Hopper sent.
“Then I will keep learning,” Perrin said.
There is little time.
“I will learn more quickly.”
Can you?
“We have no other choice.”
You could choose not to fight him.
Perrin shook his head. “Do we run from our prey? If we do,
they’ll hunt us instead. I will face him, and I need to be
prepared.”
There is a way. The wolf smelled of worry.
“I’ll do what I have to.”
Follow. Hopper vanished, and Perrin caught an unexpected
scent: refuse and mud, burning wood and coal. People.
Perrin shifted and found himself atop a building in Caemlyn.
He had visited this city only twice, and briefly, and seeing the
beautiful Inner City before him—ancient buildings, domes and
spires rising atop the hill like majestic pines atop a crowned
mountain—gave him pause. He was near the old wall, beyond
which spread the New City.
Hopper sat at his side, looking over the beautiful city. Much
of the city itself was said to be Ogier-built, and Perrin could
believe it, with that marvelous beauty. Tar Valon was said to be
more grand than Caemlyn. Perrin had trouble believing that
was possible.
“Why are we here?” Perrin asked.
Men dream here, Hopper replied.
In the real world, they did. Here, the place was empty. It
was light enough to be day, despite that storm overhead, and
Perrin felt there should be people crowding the streets. Women,
going to and from market. Nobles atop horses. Wagons bearing
barrels of ale and sacks of grain. Children scampering,
slipfingers searching for marks, workers replacing paving stones,
enterprising hawkers offering meat pies to them all.
Instead, there were hints. Shadows. A fallen handkerchief on
the street. Doors that were open one moment, then closed the
next. A thrown horseshoe sticking from the mud of an
alleyway. It was as if all of the people had been whisked away,
snatched by Fades or some monster from a gleeman’s dark
tale.
A woman appeared momentarily below. She wore a beautiful
green and gold dress. She stared at the street, eyes glazed
over, then was gone. People did occasionally appear in the wolf
dream. Perrin figured it must happen to them when they were
asleep, part of their natural dreams.
This place, Hopper said, is not only a place of wolves. It
is a place of all.
“Of all?” Perrin asked, sitting down on the rooftiles.
All souls know this place, Hopper said. They come here
when they reach for it.
“When they’re dreaming.”
Yes, Hopper said, lying down beside him. The fear-dreams of
men are strong. So very strong. Sometimes, those terrible
dreams come here. That sending was an enormous wolf, the
size of a building, knocking aside much smaller wolves who
tried to snap at him. There was a scent of terror and death
about the wolf. Like…a nightmare.
Perrin nodded slowly.
Many wolves have been caught in the pains of these
fear-dreams. They appear more commonly where men might
walk, though the dream lives without those who created it.
Hopper looked at Perrin. Hunting in the fear-dreams will
teach you strength. But you might die. It is very dangerous.
“I don’t have time to be safe anymore,” Perrin said. “Let’s do
it.”
Hopper didn’t ask if he was certain. He jumped down to the
street, and Perrin followed, landing softly. Hopper began to lope
forward, so Perrin broke into a jog.
“How do we find them?” Perrin asked.
Smell fear, Hopper sent. Terror.
Perrin closed his eyes, breathing in deeply. Just as doors
flashed open and closed, in the wolf dream he could sometimes
smell things there for a moment, then gone. Musty winter
potatoes. The dung of a passing horse. A pie, baking.
When he opened his eyes, he saw none of these things.
They weren’t really there, but they almost were. They could
have been.
There, Hopper said, vanishing. Perrin followed, appearing
beside the wolf outside of a narrow alleyway. Inside, it looked
too dark to be natural.
Go in, Hopper said. You will not last long your first time.
I will come for you. Remember it is not. Remember it is
false.
Feeling worried, but determined, Perrin stepped into the
alleyway. The walls to either side were black, as if they’d been
painted. Only…these walls were too dark to be painted. Was
that a tuft of grass beneath his foot? The sky above had
stopped boiling, and he thought he could see stars peeking
down. A pale moon, far too large, appeared in the sky,
shrouded in clouds. It gave a cold glow, like ice.
He wasn’t in the city anymore. He turned about, alarmed, to
find himself in a forest. The trees had thick trunks and were
of no species he could recognize. Their branches were naked.
The bark was a faint gray, lit by the phantom light above, and
looked like bone.
He needed to get back to the city! Out of this terrible place.
He turned around.
Something flashed in the night, and he spun. “Who’s there!”
he shouted.
A woman burst from the darkness, running in a mad
scramble. She wore a loose white robe, little more than a shift,
and she had long dark hair streaming behind her. She saw
him and froze, then turned and made as if to run in a
different direction.
Perrin cut her off, snatching her hand, pulling her back. She
struggled, feet marring the loamy dark ground beneath as she
tried to pull away. She was gasping. In and out. In and out.
She smelled frantic.
“I need to know the way out!” Perrin said. “We have to
return to the city.”
She met his eyes. “He’s coming,” she hissed. Her hand
slipped from his and she ran, vanishing into the night, the
darkness enfolding her like a shroud. Perrin took a step
forward, hand outstretched.
He heard something behind him. He turned slowly to find
something enormous. A looming shadow that sucked in the
moonlight. The thing seemed to draw breath away, absorbing
his very life and will.
The thing reared up taller. It was taller than the trees, a
hulking monster with arms as thick as barrels, its face and
body lost in shadow. It opened deep red eyes, like two huge
coals flaring to life.
I need to fight it! Perrin thought, hammer appearing in his
hand. He took a step forward, then thought better of it. Light!
That thing was enormous. He couldn’t fight it, not out in the
open like this. He needed cover.
He turned and ran through the hostile woods. The thing
followed. He could hear it snapping branches, its footsteps
making the earth shake. Ahead of him, he saw the woman,
her thin white gown slowing her as it caught on a branch. She
pulled free and continued to run.
The creature loomed. It would catch him, consume him,
destroy him! He yelled for the woman, reaching out toward
her. She glanced over her shoulder at him, and tripped.
Perrin cursed. He scrambled to her side, to help her up. But
the thing was so close!
It was a fight, then. His heart was thumping as quickly as a
woodlark pecking a tree. Hands sweaty, he turned, gripping his
hammer to face the terrible thing behind. He placed himself
between it and the woman.
It reared up, growing larger, those red eyes blazing with fire.
Light! He couldn’t fight that, could he? He needed an edge of
some kind. “What is that thing?” he desperately asked of the
woman. “Why does it chase us?”
“It’s him,” she hissed. “The Dragon Reborn.”
Perrin froze. The Dragon Reborn. But…but that was Rand.
It’s a nightmare, he reminded himself. None of this is real. I
can’t let myself be caught up in it!
The ground trembled, as if moaning. He could feel the heat
of the monster’s eyes. A scrambling sound came from behind
as the woman ran, leaving him.
Perrin stood up, legs shaking, every instinct crying for him to
run. But no. He couldn’t fight it, either. He could not accept
this as real.
A wolf howled, then leaped into the clearing. Hopper seemed
to push back the darkness. The creature bent down toward
Perrin, reaching a massive hand as if to crush him.
This was an alley.
Inside of Caemlyn.
It wasn’t real.
It was not.
The darkness around them faded. The enormous dark
shadow creature warped in the air, like a piece of cloth being
stretched. The moon vanished. A small pocket of ground—the
dirty, trampled earth of an alley—appeared at their feet.
Then, with a snap, the dream was gone. Perrin stood in the
alley again, Hopper at his side, no sign of the forest or the
terrible creature that someone had viewed as the Dragon
Reborn.
Perrin exhaled slowly. Sweat dripped from his brow. He
reached up to wipe it away, then willed the sweat away
instead.
Hopper vanished, and Perrin followed, finding himself on the
same rooftop as before. He sat down. Merely thinking of that
shadow made him shiver. “It felt so real,” he said. “A piece of
me knew it was a nightmare. I couldn’t help but try to fight,
or try to run. When I did either, it grew stronger, didn’t it?
Because I accepted it was real?”
Yes. You must not believe what you see.
Perrin nodded. “There was a woman in there. Part of the
dream? She wasn’t real either?”
Yes.
“Maybe she was the one who dreamed it,” Perrin said. “The
one having the original nightmare, caught up in it and trapped
here in the World of Dreams.”
Men who dream do not stay here long, Hopper sent. To
him, that was the end of the discussion. You were strong,
Young Bull. You did well. He smelled proud.
“It helped when she called the thing the Dragon Reborn.
That showed it wasn’t real. Helped me believe it wasn’t.”
You did well, foolish cub, Hopper repeated. Perhaps you
can learn.
“Only if I keep practicing. We need to do that again. Can
you find another?”
Yes, Hopper sent. There are always nightmares when your
kind is near. Always. The wolf turned northward again,
however. Perrin had thought that the thing that had been
distracting him earlier was the dreams, but it didn’t seem to
have been the case.
“What is up there?” Perrin asked. “What is it you keep
looking toward?”
It comes, Hopper sent.
“What?”
The Last Hunt. It begins. Or it does not.
Perrin frowned, standing. “You mean…right now?”
The decision will be made. Soon.
“What decision?” Hopper’s sendings were confusing, and he
couldn’t decipher them. Light and darkness, a void and fire, a
coldness and a terrible, terrible heat. Mixed with wolves
howling, calling, lending strength.
Come. Hopper stood, looking to the northeast.
Hopper vanished. Perrin shifted after him, appearing low
down on the slopes of the Dragonmount, beside an
outcropping of stone.
“Light,” Perrin said softly, looking up in awe. The storm that
had been brewing for months had come to a head. A massive
black thunderhead dominated the sky, covering the top of the
mountain. It spun slowly in the air, an enormous vortex of
blackness, emitting bolts of lightning that connected to the
clouds above. In other parts of the wolf dream the clouds were
tempestuous, yet distant. This felt immediate.
This was…the focus of something. Perrin could feel it. Often,
the wolf dream reflected things in the real world in strange or
unexpected ways.
Hopper stood on the outcropping. Perrin could feel wolves all
across the slopes of Dragonmount. In even greater numbers
than he’d felt here recently.
They wait, Hopper said. The Last Hunt comes.
As Perrin reached out, he found that other packs were
coming, still distant but moving toward Dragonmount. Perrin
looked upward at the monstrous peak. The tomb of the
Dragon, Lews Therin. It was a monument to his madness, to
both his failure and his success. His pride and his self-sacrifice.
“The wolves,” Perrin said. “They gather for the Last Hunt?”
Yes. If it occurs.
Perrin turned back to Hopper. “You said that it would. ‘The
Last Hunt comes,’ you said.”
A choice must be made, Young Bull. One path leads to the
Last Hunt.
“And the other?” Perrin asked.
Hopper didn’t respond immediately. He turned toward
Dragonmount. The other path does not lead to the Last
Hunt.
“Yes, but what does it lead to?”
To nothing.
Perrin opened his mouth to press further, but then the
weight of Hopper’s sending hit him. “Nothing” to the wolf
meant a vacant den, all of the pups taken by trappers. A night
sky empty of stars. The moon fading. The smell of old blood,
dry, stale and flaked away.
Perrin closed his mouth. The sky continued to churn with
that black storm. He smelled it on the wind, the smell of
broken trees and dirt, of flooded fields and lightning fires. As
so often, particularly recently, those scents seemed to contrast
with the world around him. One of his senses told him he was
in the very center of a catastrophe while the others saw
nothing amiss.
“This choice. Why don’t we just make it?”
It is not our choice, Young Bull.
Perrin felt drawn to the clouds above. Despite himself, he
began to walk up the slope. Hopper loped up beside him. It is
dangerous above, Young Bull.
“I know,” Perrin said. But he couldn’t stop. Instead, he
increased his speed, each step launching him just a little
farther. Hopper ran beside him, passing trees, rocks, groups of
watching wolves. Upward Perrin and Hopper went, climbing
until the trees dwindled and the ground grew cold with frost
and ice.
Eventually, they approached the cloud itself. It seemed a dark
fog, shaking with currents as it spun. Perrin hesitated at the
perimeter, then stepped inside. It was like stepping into the
nightmare. The wind was suddenly violent, the air buzzing with
energy. Leaves and dirt and grit blew in the tempest, and he
had to raise a hand against it.
No, he thought.
A small bubble of calm air opened around him. The tempest
continued to blow just inches from his face, and he had to
strain to keep from being claimed by it again. This storm
wasn’t a nightmare or a dream; it was something more vast,
something more real. This time, Perrin was the one creating
something abnormal with the bubble of safety.
He pressed forward, soon leaving tracks in snow. Hopper
strode against the wind, lessening its effect on him as well. He
was stronger at it than Perrin was—Perrin barely managed to
keep his own bubble up. He feared that without it, he would
be sucked into the storm and tossed into the air. He saw
large branches rip past in the air, and even some smaller
trees.
Hopper slowed, then sat down in the snow. He looked
upward, toward the peak. I cannot stay, the wolf sent. This is
not my place.
“I understand,” Perrin said.
The wolf vanished, but Perrin continued. He couldn’t explain
what drew him, but he knew that he needed to witness.
Someone did. He walked for what seemed like hours, focused
completely on only two things: keeping the winds off him and
putting one foot in front of the other.
The storm grew increasingly violent. It was so bad here that
he couldn’t keep all of the storm off, just the worst of it. He
passed the ridged lip where the mountaintop was broken,
picking his way alongside it, hunkered against the gusts, a
steep fall on either side. Wind began to whip at his clothing,
and he had to squint his eyes against the dust and snow in
the air.
But he continued on. Striving for the peak, which rose ahead,
rising above the blasted out side of the mountain. He knew
that atop that point, he would find what he searched for. This
horrible maelstrom was the wolf dream’s reaction to something
great, something terrible. In this place, sometimes things were
more real than in the waking world. The dream reflected a
tempest because something very important was happening. He
worried that it was something terrible.
Perrin pressed forward, shoving his way through the snows,
crawling up rock faces, his fingers leaving skin sticking to the
frigid stones. But he had trained well these last few weeks. He
leapt chasms he shouldn’t have been able to leap and climbed
rocks that should have been too high for him.
A figure stood at the very top of the jagged, broken tip of
the mountain. Perrin kept pressing onward. Someone needed to
watch. Someone needed to be there when it happened.
Finally, Perrin heaved atop one last stone and found himself
within a dozen feet of the top. He could make out the figure
now. The man stood at the very heart of the vortex of winds,
staring eastward, motionless. He was faint and translucent, a
reflection of the real world. Like a shadow. Perrin had never
seen anything like it.
It was Rand, of course. Perrin had known that it would be.
Perrin held to the stone with one ragged hand and pulled his
cloak close with the other—he’d created the cloak several cliff
faces ago. He blinked through reddened eyes, gazing upward.
He had to focus most of his concentration on pushing back
some of the winds to keep himself from being flung out into
the tempest.
Lightning flashed suddenly, thunder sounding for the first time
since he’d begun climbing. That lightning began to arc in a
dome around the top of the mountain. It threw light across
Rand’s face. That hard, impassive face, like stone itself. Where
had its curves gone? When had Rand gained so many lines
and angles? And those eyes, they seemed made of marble!
Rand wore a coat of black and red. Fine and ornamented,
with a sword at his waist. The winds didn’t affect Rand’s
clothes. Those fell unnaturally still, as if he really were just a
statue. Carved from stone. The only thing that moved was his
dark red hair, blowing in the wind, thrown and spun.
Perrin clung to the rocks for his life, cold wind biting into his
cheeks, his fingers and feet so numb he could barely feel
them. His beard bristled with dusty ice and snow. Something
black began to spin around Rand. It wasn’t part of the storm;
it seemed like night itself leaking from him. Tendrils of it grew
from Rand’s own skin, like tiny hands curling back and
wrapping around him. It seemed evil itself given life.
“Rand!” Perrin bellowed. “Fight it! Rand!”
His voice was lost in the wind, and he doubted that Rand
could have heard him anyway. The darkness continued to seep
out, like a liquid tar coming through Rand’s pores, creating a
miasma of pitch around the Dragon Reborn. Within moments,
Perrin could barely see Rand through the blackness. It enclosed
him, cutting him off, banishing him. The Dragon Reborn was
gone. Only evil remained.
“Rand, please…” Perrin whispered.
And then—from the midst of the blackness, from the center
of the uproar and the tempest—a tiny sliver of light split
through the evil. Like a candle’s glow on a very dark night.
The light shone upward, toward the distant sky, like a beacon.
So frail.
The tempest buffeted it. The winds stormed, howled, and
screamed. The lightning beat against the top of the rocky peak,
blasting free chunks of rock, scoring the ground. The blackness
undulated and pulsed.
But still the light shone.
A web of cracks appeared down the side of the shell of evil
blackness, light shining from within. Another fracture joined it,
and another. Something strong was inside, something glowing,
something brilliant.
The shell exploded outward, vaporizing and releasing a
column of light so bright, so incredible that it seemed to sear
the eyes from Perrin’s head. But he looked on anyway, not
raising arm to shade or block the resplendent image before
him. Rand stood within that light, mouth open as if bellowing
toward the skies above. The sun-yellowed column shot into the
air, and the storm seemed to shudder
, the entire sky itself
undulating.
The tempest vanished.
That column of fiery light became a column of sunlight
streaming down, illuminating the peak of Dragonmount. Perrin
pulled his fingers free from the rock, gazing on with wonder at
Rand standing within the light. It seemed so long, so very long,
since Perrin had seen a ray of pure sunlight.
The wolves began to howl. It was a howl of triumph, of glory
and of victory. Perrin raised his head and howled as well,
becoming Young Bull for a moment. He could feel the pool of
sunlight growing, and it washed over him, its warmth banishing
the frozen chill. He barely noticed when Rand’s image vanished,
for he left that sunlight behind.
Wolves appeared around Perrin, flashing into existence
midleap. They continued to bay, jumping at one another,
exulting and dancing in the sunlight as it washed over them.
They yipped and barked, tossing up patches of snow as they
bounded. Hopper was among them, and he leaped into the air,
soaring over to Perrin.
The Last Hunt begins, Young Bull! Hopper screamed. We
live. We live!
Perrin turned back to the place where Rand had stood. If
that darkness had taken Rand…
But it hadn’t. He smiled broadly. “The Last Hunt has come!”
he screamed to the wolves. “Let it begin!”
They howled their agreement, as loud as the storm had been
just moments before.

“You understand what you are to do?” Egwene asked, walking
toward her rooms in the White Tower.
Siuan nodded.
“If they do appear,” Egwene said, “you will not let yourself
be drawn into a fight.”
“We’re not children, Mother,” Siuan said dryly.
“No, you’re Aes Sedai—nearly as bad at following directions.”
Siuan gave her a flat look, and Egwene regretted her words.
They had been uncalled-for; she was on edge. She calmed
herself.
She had tried several forms of bait to lure Mesaana out, but
so far, there hadn’t been any nibbles. Egwene swore she could
almost feel the woman watching her in Tel’aran’rhiod. Yukiri
and her group were at a standstill.
Her best hope was the meeting tonight. It had to draw her.
Egwene didn’t have any time left—the monarchs she’d
persuaded were already beginning to move, and Rand’s forces
were gathering.
Tonight. It must happen tonight.
“Go,” Egwene said. “Speak with the others. I don’t want there
to be any foolish mistakes.”
“Yes, Mother,” Siuan grumbled, turning away.
“And Siuan,” Egwene called after her.
The former Amyrlin hesitated.
“See to your safety tonight,” Egwene said. “I would not lose
you.”
Siuan often gave such concern a crusty reply, but tonight she
smiled. Egwene shook her head and hurried on to her rooms,
where she found Silviana waiting.
“Gawyn?” Egwene asked.
“There has been no news of him,” Silviana replied. “I sent a
messenger for him this afternoon, but the messenger hasn’t
returned. I suspect that Gawyn is delaying his reply to be
difficult.”
“He’s nothing if not stubborn,” Egwene said. She felt exposed
without him. That was surprising, since she’d pointedly ordered
him to stay away from her door. Now she worried about him
not being there?
“Double my guard, and make certain to have soldiers posted
nearby. If my wards go off, they will raise a clatter.”
“Yes, Mother,” Silviana said.
“And send Gawyn another messenger,” she said. “One with a
more politely worded letter. Ask him to return; don’t order
him.” Knowing Silviana’s opinion of Gawyn, Egwene was sure
the original letter had been brusque.
With that, Egwene took a deep breath, then went into her
rooms, checked on her wards, and prepared to go to sleep.
I shouldn’t feel so exhausted, Perrin thought as he climbed
down from Stepper. I didn’t do anything but talk.
The trial weighed on him. It seemed to weigh upon the entire
army. Perrin looked at them as they rode back into camp.
Morgase was there, off on her own. Faile had watched her the
whole way back, smelling of anger, but not speaking a word.
Alliandre and Berelain had kept their distance.
Morgase had condemned him, but in truth, he didn’t much
care. He had deflected the Whitecloaks; now he needed to lead
his people to safety. Morgase rode through camp, seeking out
Lini and Master Gill. They’d arrived safely, together with all the
other captives, as Galad Damodred had promised. Surprisingly,
he’d sent the supplies and carts with them.
The trial was a victory, then. Perrin’s men didn’t seem to see
it that way. The soldiers split into groups as they slunk back
into camp. There was little talking.
Beside Perrin, Gaul shook his head. “Two silver points.”
“What’s that?” Perrin asked, handing Stepper to a groom.
“A saying,” Gaul said, glancing up at the sky. “Two silver
points. Twice we have run to battle and found no foe. Once
more, and we lose honor.”
“Better to find no foe, Gaul,” Perrin said. “Better no blood be
shed.”
Gaul laughed. “I do not say I wish to end the dream, Perrin
Aybara. But look at your men. They can feel what I say. You
should not dance the spears without purpose, but neither
should you too often demand that men prepare themselves to
kill, then give them nobody to fight.”
“I’ll do it as often as I like,” Perrin said gruffly, “if it means
avoiding a battle. I—”
A horse’s hooves thumped the ground, and the wind brought
him Faile’s scent as he turned to face her.
“A battle avoided indeed, Perrin Aybara,” Gaul said, “and
another invited. May you find water and shade.” He trotted
away as Faile dismounted.
Perrin took a deep breath.
“All right, husband,” she said, striding up to him. “You will
explain to me just what you thought you were doing. You let
him pass judgment on you? You promised to deliver yourself
to him? I wasn’t under the impression that I’d married a fool!”
“I’m no fool, woman,” he roared back. “You keep telling me
I need to lead. Well, today I took your advice!”
“You took it and made the wrong decision.”
“There was no right decision!”
“You could have let us fight them.”
“They intend to fight at the Last Battle,” Perrin said. “Every
Whitecloak we killed would be one less man to face the Dark
One. Me, my men, the Whitecloaks—none of us matter
compared to what is coming! They had to live, and so did we.
And this was the only way!”
Light, but it felt wrong to yell at her. Yet it actually softened
her temper. Remarkably, the soldiers nearby him started to
nod, as if they hadn’t been able to see the truth until he’d
bellowed it out.
“I want you to take command of the retreat,” Perrin said to
Faile. “The trap hasn’t sprung yet, but I find myself itching
more each minute. Something’s watching us; they have taken
away our gateways, and they intend to see us dead. They now
know we won’t fight the Whitecloaks, which means they’ll
attack soon. Maybe this evening; if we’re lucky, they’ll delay
until tomorrow morning.”
“We aren’t done with this argument,” she warned.
“What’s done is done, Faile. Look forward.”
“Very well.” She still smelled angry, those beautiful dark eyes
of hers fierce, but she contained it.
“I’m going to the wolf dream,” Perrin said, glancing toward
the edge of camp, where their tent lay. “I’ll either destroy that
dome, or I’ll find a way to force Slayer to tell me how to
make Traveling work again. Get the people ready to march,
and have the Asha’man try to make a gateway on every count
of a hundred. The moment it works, get our people out of
here.”
“Where?” Faile asked. “Jehannah?”
Perrin shook his head. “Too close. The enemy might be
watching there. Andor. Take them to Caemlyn. Actually, no.
Whitebridge. Let’s stay away from anywhere they might expect.
Besides, I don’t want to show up with an army on Elayne’s
doorstep until I’ve warned her.”
“A good plan,” Faile said. “If you fear attack, we should
move the camp followers first, rather than moving the armies
through and leaving us undefended.”
Perrin nodded. “But get them moving as soon as the
gateways work again.”
“And if you don’t succeed?” Faile had begun to sound
determined. Frightened, but determined.
“If I haven’t restored gateways in one hour, start them
marching toward the perimeter where Neald discovered that he
can make gateways. I don’t think that will work; I think Slayer
will just move the dome, always keeping us underneath it. But
it’s something.”
Faile nodded, but her scent became hesitant. “That will also
put us marching, rather than in camp. Much easier to ambush
that way.”
“I know,” Perrin said. “That is why I must not fail.”
She took him into her arms, head against his chest. She
smelled so wonderful. Like Faile. That was the definition of
wonderful to him. “You’ve said he’s stronger than you are,”
she whispered.
“He is.”
“Can I do anything to help you face him?” she asked softly.
“If you watch over them while I’m gone, that will help.”
“What happens if he kills you while you’re there?”
Perrin didn’t reply.
“There’s no other way?” she asked.
He pulled back from her. “Faile, I’m fairly certain that he’s
Lord Luc. They smell different, but there’s something similar
about them, too. And when I wounded Slayer in the wolf
dream before, Luc bore the wound.”
“Is that supposed to help me feel better?” she asked,
grimacing.
“It’s all coming back around. We finish with Malden and find
ourselves within a stone’s toss of the remnants of the
Whitecloaks, Byar and Bornhald with them. Slayer appears in
the wolf dream again. That man I told you of, Noam, the one
who was in the cage. Do you remember where I found him?”
“You said you were chasing Rand. Through…”
“Ghealdan,” Perrin said. “It happened not one week’s ride
from here.”
“An odd coincidence, but—”
“No coincidences, Faile. Not with me. I’m here for a reason.
He’s here for a reason. I must face this.”
She nodded. He turned to walk toward their tent, her hand
slipping free of his. The Wise Ones had given him a tea that
would let him sleep so he could enter the wolf dream.
It was time.
“How could you let him go?” Byar said, knuckles clenched on
the pommel of his sword, white cloak flapping behind him. He,
Bornhald and Galad walked through the middle of their camp.
“I did what was right,” Galad said.
“Letting him go free was not right!” Byar said. “You can’t
believe—”
“Child Byar,” Galad said softly, “I find your attitude
increasingly insubordinate. That troubles me. It should trouble
you as well.”
Byar closed his mouth and said no more, though Galad could
see that it was difficult for him to hold his tongue. Behind
Byar, Bornhald walked silently, looking very upset.
“I believe that Aybara will keep his oath,” Galad said. “And if
he does not, I now have the legal grounds to hunt him and
exact punishment. It is not ideal, but there was wisdom to his
words. I do believe the Last Battle is coming, and if so, it is
time to unite against the Shadow.”
“My Lord Captain Commander,” Byar said, managing his
tone, “with all respect, that man is of the Shadow. He will not
be fighting beside us, but against us.”
“If that is true,” Galad said, “we will still have a chance to
face him on the field of battle. I have made my decision, Child
Byar.” Harnesh strode up to join them and saluted. Galad
nodded. “Child Harnesh, strike camp.”
“My Lord Captain Commander? This late in the day?”
“Yes,” Galad said. “We will march into the night and put
some distance between us and Aybara, just in case. Leave
scouts, make certain he doesn’t try to follow us. We’ll make for
Lugard. We can recruit and resupply, then continue on toward
Andor.”
“Yes, my Lord Captain Commander,” Harnesh said.
Galad turned to Byar as Harnesh left. The skeletal man gave
a salute, sunken eyes dangerously resentful, then stalked off.
Galad stopped on the field, between white tents, hands behind
his back as he watched messengers relay his orders through
camp.
“You are quiet, Child Bornhald,” Galad said after a few
moments. “Are you as displeased with my actions as Child
Byar is?”
“I don’t know,” Bornhald said. “I’ve believed for so long that
Aybara killed my father. And yet, seeing how Jaret acts,
remembering his description…There is no evidence. It frustrates
me to admit it, Galad, but I have no proof. He did kill Lathin
and Yamwick, however. He killed Children, so he is a
Darkfriend.”
“I killed one of the Children, too,” Galad said. “And was
named Darkfriend for it.”
“That was different.” Something seemed to be troubling
Bornhald, something he wasn’t saying.
“Well, that is true,” Galad said. “I do not disagree that Aybara
should be punished, but the day’s events leave me strangely
troubled.”
He shook his head. Finding answers should be easy. The
right thing always came to him. However, whenever he thought
he’d seized upon the right course of action regarding Aybara,
he found distasteful worries cropping up inside of him.
Life is not so easy as the toss of a coin, his mother had
said. One side or the other…your simple illusions…
He did not like the feeling. Not at all.
Perrin inhaled deeply. Flowers bloomed in the wolf dream, even
as the sky raged silver, black and gold. The scents were so
incongruous. Baking cherry pie. Horse dung. Oil and grease.
Soap. A wood fire. Arrath. Thyme. Catfern. A hundred other
herbs he couldn’t name.
Very few of them fit the meadow where he had appeared.
He’d made certain not to appear where his camp was in the
wolf dream; that would have put him too near Slayer.
The scents were fleeting. Vanishing too quickly, as if they’d
never really been there.
Hopper, he sent.
I am here, Young Bull. The wolf appeared beside him.
“It smells strange.”
Scents blend, Hopper sent. Like the waters of a thousand
streams. It is not natural. It is not good. This place begins
to break.
Perrin nodded. He shifted, appearing knee deep in brown
cockleburrs just outside of the violet dome. Hopper appeared
to his right, weeds crackling as he moved among them.
The dome rose, ominous and unnatural. A wind blew,
shuffling the weeds and shaking tree limbs. Lightning flashed
silently in the sky.
He is there, Hopper sent. Always.
Perrin nodded. Did Slayer come to the wolf dream the way
Perrin did? And did spending time in it leave him still tired, as
it did Perrin? The man never seemed to leave this area.
He was guarding something. There had to be a way in the
wolf dream to disable the dome.
Young Bull, we come. The sending was from Oak Dancer.
Her pack was approaching, now only three strong. Sparks,
Boundless, Oak Dancer herself. They had chosen to come here,
rather than join the wolves running northward.
The three appeared behind Hopper. Perrin looked to them,
and sent concern. This will be dangerous. Wolves may die.
Their sending back was insistent. Slayer must fall for what
he has done. Together we are strong. Young Bull should not
hunt such dangerous prey alone.
He nodded in agreement, letting his hammer appear in his
hand. Together, they approached the dome. Perrin walked into
it with a slow, determined stride. He refused to feel weakness.
He was strong. The dome was nothing but air. He believed
the world to be as he wished it.
He stumbled, but pulled through into the inside of the dome.
The landscape felt faintly darker here. Elder trees more dim of
bark, the dying dogfennel a deeper green or brown. Hopper
and the pack moved through the dome around him.
We make for the center, Perrin sent. If there is a secret to
discover, it will probably be there.
They moved slowly through the brush and stands of trees.
Perrin imposed his will upon the area around him, and the
leaves stopped crackling, weeds remaining silent when he
brushed against them. That was natural. It was the way things
should be. So it was.
It would be a long distance to the center, so Perrin began
hopping forward. Not jumps or steps; he simply stopped being
in one place, appearing in a different location. He masked his
scent, though Slayer was not a wolf.
That has to become my advantage, Perrin thought as they
grew closer and closer to the center. He is more experienced
than I. But I have the wolf within me. This place is our
dream. He is the invader. However skilled he may be, he is
not one of us.
And that is why I will win.
Perrin smelled something; an increasing wrongness in the air.
He and the wolves crept up to a large hillside, then peered
around a cleft in the land there. A small stand of elder trees
stood just ahead, perhaps fifty paces away. Looking up, he
judged this to be very near the center of the dome. Using the
shifting way of wolves, they’d traveled several hours’ worth of
walking in a few minutes.
That is it, Perrin sent. He looked at Hopper. The wolf’s
scent was masked, but he was coming to know wolves well
enough to read concern in Hopper’s stare and the way he
stood with forelegs bent just a fraction.
Something changed.
Perrin heard nothing. He smelled nothing. But he felt
something, a small tremble in the ground.
Go! he sent, vanishing. He appeared ten paces away to see
an arrow hit the hillside where he’d been standing. The shaft
split a large stone, embedding itself in the rock and earth up
to its black fletching.
Slayer stood from a crouch, turning to look at Perrin across
the short expanse of ground. His eyes seemed black, his
square face shadowed, his tall body muscular and dangerous.
As he often did, he wore a smile. Really a sneer. He wore
leather breeches and a shirt of deep green, forearms exposed,
hand holding his wicked bow of dark wood. He wore no
quiver; he created arrows as he needed them.
Perrin held his eyes, stepping forward as if in challenge. That
was enough of a distraction for the wolves to attack from
behind.
Slayer yelled, spinning as Boundless slammed into him. Perrin
was there in an eyeblink, bringing his hammer down. Slayer
vanished, and Perrin struck only earth, but he caught a whiff
of where Slayer had gone.
Here? That scent was of the same place that Perrin was.
Alarmed, he looked up to see Slayer hovering in the air just
above, drawing an arrow.
The wind, Perrin thought. It is so strong!
The arrow loosed, but a sudden gust blew it sideways. It
sank into the earth just beside Perrin. He did not flinch, raising
his hands, his own bow appearing in them. Already drawn,
arrow in place.
Slayer’s eyes opened wider as Perrin loosed. Slayer vanished,
appearing on the ground a short distance away—and Hopper
leaped on him from above, pulling him to the ground. Slayer
cursed with a guttural sound, then vanished.
Here, Hopper sent, showing a hillside.
Perrin was there in an instant, hammer in his hands, the
pack with him. Slayer raised a sword in one hand and a knife
in the other as Perrin and the four wolves attacked.
Perrin hit first, swinging his hammer with a roar. Slayer
actually sank into the ground, as if it were liquid, dropping
beneath the hammer blow. He rammed his knife
forward—piercing Oak Dancer’s breast with a splash of scarlet
blood as he swung to the side, slashing across Sparks’ face.
Oak Dancer didn’t get time to howl; she collapsed to the
ground, and Slayer vanished as Perrin brought his hammer
back around. Whimpering, Sparks sent agony and panic and
vanished. He would live. But Oak Dancer was dead.
Slayer’s scent had been this place again. Perrin turned to
smash his hammer into Slayer’s sword as it sought to pierce
him from behind. Again a look of surprise from Slayer. The
man bared his teeth, pulling back, keeping a wary eye on the
two remaining wolves, Hopper and Boundless. Slayer’s forearm
was bleeding where Hopper had bitten him.
“How is the dome created, Luc?” Perrin said. “Show me and
leave. I will let you depart.”
“Bold words, cub,” Slayer snarled back. “For one who just
watched me kill one of your pack.”
Boundless howled in anger, leaping forward. Perrin attacked at
the same time, but the ground beneath them trembled, shaking.
No, Perrin thought. His own footing became firm as
Boundless was knocked to the ground.
Slayer lunged, and Perrin raised his hammer to block—but
Slayer’s weapon turned into smoke and passed right through it,
solidifying on the other side. With a yelp, Perrin tried to pull
back, but the blade scored him across the chest, cutting
through his shirt and leaving a gash from one arm to the
other. It flared with pain.
Perrin gasped, stumbling backward. Slayer drove forward, but
something crashed into him from above. Hopper. Once again
the grizzled wolf bore Slayer to the ground, growling, fangs
flashing.
Slayer cursed and kicked the wolf free. Hopper went flying
with a whimper of pain, tossed some twenty feet. To the side,
Boundless had caused the earth to stop rumbling, but had hurt
his paw.
Perrin shook himself free of his pain. Slayer was strong in
control over this world. Perrin’s hammer felt sluggish whenever
he swung, as if the air itself were thicker.
Slayer had smiled when he’d killed Oak Dancer. Perrin moved
forward, enraged. Slayer was on his feet and retreating back
down the hillside, toward the trees. Perrin chased after him,
ignoring his wound. It wasn’t bad enough to stop him, though
he did imagine a bandage in place on it, his clothing mended
and tight against his chest to stanch the blood.
He entered the trees just behind Slayer. The branches closed
overhead, and vines whipped from the darkened shadows.
Perrin didn’t bother fighting them off. Vines didn’t move like
that. They couldn’t touch him. Sure enough, as soon as they
grew close, they withered and fell still.
Slayer cursed, then began to move in bursting steps, leaving
a blur behind him. Perrin followed, enhancing his own speed.
Perrin didn’t consciously make the decision to drop to four
legs, but in a heartbeat he had done so, chasing after Slayer
as he’d hunted the white stag.
Slayer was fast, but he was merely a man. Young Bull was
part of the land itself, the trees, the brush, the stones, the
rivers. He moved through the forest like a breeze blowing
through a hollow, keeping pace with Slayer, gaining on him.
Each log in Slayer’s way was an obstruction, but to Young Bull
each was just a part of the pathway.
Young Bull leaped to the side, paws against the tree trunks
pushing him when he turned. He soared, over stones and
rocks, leaping from one to the next, leaving a blur in the air
behind him.
Slayer smelled afraid for the first time. He vanished, but
Young Bull followed, appearing in the field where the army
camped, beneath the shadow of the large stone sword. Slayer
looked over his shoulder and cursed, vanishing again.
Young Bull followed. The place where the Whitecloaks had
made camp.
The top of a small plateau.
A cavern burrowed into a hillside.
The middle of a small lake. Young Bull ran upon the surface
with ease.
Each place Slayer went, he followed, each moment growing
closer. There was no time for swords, hammers, or bows. This
was a chase, and Young Bull was the hunter this time. He—
He leaped into the middle of a field, and Slayer wasn’t there.
He smelled where the man had gone, however. He followed
him, and appeared in another place on the same field. There
were scents of places all around. What?
Perrin came to a stop, booted feet grinding into the ground.
He spun, bewildered. Slayer must have hopped quickly through
several different places in the same field, confusing his trail.
Perrin tried to determine which one to follow, but they all
faded and intermixed.
“Burn him!” he said.
Young Bull, a sending came. Sparks. The wolf had been
wounded, but he hadn’t fled as Perrin had assumed. He sent
an image of a thin silver rod, two handspans high, sprouting
from the ground in the middle of a stand of dogfennel.
Perrin smiled and sent himself there. The wounded wolf, still
trailing blood, lay beside the object. It was obviously some sort
of ter’angreal. It appeared to be made of dozens upon
dozens of fine, wirelike bits of metal woven together like a
braid. It was about two handspans long, and was driven point
first into the soft earth.
Perrin pulled it from the ground. The dome didn’t vanish. He
turned the spike over in his hand, but had no idea how to
make the dome stop. He willed the spike to change into
something else, a stick, and was shocked when he was
rebuffed. The object actually seemed to push his mind away.
It is here in its reality, Sparks sent. The sending tried to
convey something, that the item was somehow more real than
most things in the dream world.
Perrin didn’t have time to wonder about it. First priority was
to move the dome, if he could, away from where his people
camped. He sent himself to the edge where he’d entered the
dome.
As he’d hoped, the center of the dome moved with him. He
was at the place where he’d entered, but the edge of the
dome had changed positions, the center falling wherever Perrin
was standing. The dome still dominated the sky, extending far
in every direction.
Young Bull, Sparks sent. I am free. The wrongness is gone.
Go, Perrin sent. I’ll take this and get rid of it. Each of
you, go a different direction and howl. Confuse Slayer.
The wolves responded. A part of Perrin, the hunter inside of
him, was frustrated at not having been able to defeat Slayer
directly. But this was more important.
He tried to shift to someplace distant, but it didn’t work. It
appeared that even though he was holding the ter’angreal, he
was still bound by the dome’s rules.
So, instead, he shifted as far as he could. Neald had said it
was about four leagues from their camp to the perimeter, so
Perrin shifted that far to the north, then did so again, and
again. The enormous dome moved with him, its center always
appearing directly over his head.
He would take the spike someplace safe, someplace where
Slayer couldn’t find it.

Androl carefully took the oval piece of leather from the
steaming water; it had darkened and curled. He moved quickly,
picking it up in his callused fingers. The leather was springy
and flexible now.
He quickly sat down at his bench, a square of sunlight
coming in through the window on his right side. He wrapped
the leather around a thick wooden rod about two inches
across, then poked holes around the edges.
From there, he began stitching the leather to another piece
he’d prepared earlier. A good stitching around the outside
would keep it from fraying. A lot of leatherworkers were casual
about stitching. Not Androl. The stitching was what people saw
first; it stood out, like paint on a wall.
As he worked, the leather dried and lost some of its
springiness, but it was still flexible enough. He made the
stitches neat and even. He pulled the last few tight and used
them to tie the leather around the wooden rod; he’d cut those
last once the leather dried.
Stitching done, he added some ornaments. A name across
the top, pounded into place using his small mallet and
letter-topped pins. The symbols of the Sword and Dragon came
next; he’d made those plates himself, based on the pins the
Asha’man wore.
At the bottom, using his smaller letter pins, he stamped the
words, “Defend. Guard. Protect.” As the leather continued to
dry, he got out his stain and gauze to carefully color the letters
and the designs for contrast.
There was a tranquility to this kind of work; so much of his
life was about destruction these days. He knew that had to be.
He’d come to the Black Tower in the first place because he
understood what was to come. Still, it was nice to create
something.
He left his current piece, letting it dry while working on some
saddle straps. He measured the straps with the marks on the
side of his table, then reached for his shears in the tool pouch
that hung from the side of his table—he’d made that himself.
He was annoyed to discover that they weren’t in their place.
Burn the day word got out that I had good shears in
here, he thought. Despite Taim’s supposedly strict rules for the
Black Tower, there was a distressing amount of chaos. Large
infractions were punished with harsh measures, but the little
things—like wandering into a man’s workshop and “borrowing”
his shears—were ignored. Particularly if the borrower was one
of the M’Hael’s favorites.
Androl sighed. His belt knife was waiting at Cuellar’s place for
sharpening. Well, he thought, Taim does keep telling us to
look for excuses to channel… Androl emptied himself of
emotion, then seized the Source. It had been months since
he’d had trouble doing that—at first, he’d been able to channel
only when he was holding a strap of leather. The M’Hael had
beaten that out of him. It had not been a pleasant process.
Saidin flooded into him, sweet, powerful, beautiful. He sat for
a long moment, enjoying it. The taint was gone. What a
wonder that was. He closed his eyes and breathed in deeply.
What would it be like to draw in as much of the One Power
as the others could? At times, he thirsted for that. He knew
he was weak—weakest of the Dedicated in the Black Tower.
Perhaps so weak he should never have been promoted from
soldier. Logain had gone to the Lord Dragon about it, and
made the promotion happen, against Taim’s express wishes.
Androl opened his eyes, then held up the strap and wove a
tiny gateway, only an inch across. It burst alive in front of him,
slicing the strap in two. He smiled, then let it vanish and
repeated the process.
Some said that Logain had forced Androl’s promotion only as
a dig against Taim’s authority. But Logain had said that it was
Androl’s incredible Talent with gateways that had earned him
the title of Dedicated. Logain was a hard man, broken around
the edges, like an old scabbard that hadn’t been properly
lacquered. But that scabbard still held a deadly sword. Logain
was honest. A good man, beneath the scuff marks.
Androl eventually finished with the straps. He walked over
and snipped the string holding the oval piece of leather in
place. It retained its shape, and he held it up to the sunlight,
inspecting the stitching. The leather was stiff without being
brittle. He fit it onto his forearm. Yes, the molding was good.
He nodded to himself. One of the tricks to life was paying
attention to the small details. Focus, make the small things
right. If each stitch was secure on an armguard, then it
wouldn’t fray or snap. That could mean the difference between
an archer lasting through a barrage or having to put away his
bow.
One archer wouldn’t make a battle. But the small things piled
up, one atop another, until they became large things. He
finished the armguard by affixing a few permanent ties to its
back, so one could bind it in place on the arm.
He took his black coat off the back of his chair. The silver
sword pin on the high collar glimmered in the window’s
sunlight as he did up the buttons. He glanced at himself in the
glass’s reflection, making certain the coat was straight. Small
things were important. Seconds were small things, and if you
heaped enough of those on top of one another, they became a
man’s life.
He put the armguard on his arm, then pushed open the
door to his small workshop and entered the outskirts of the
Black Tower’s village. Here, clusters of two-storied buildings
were arranged much like any small town in Andor. Peaked
roofs, thatched, with straight wooden walls, some stone and
brick as well. A double line of them ran down the center of
the village. Looking only at those, one might have thought he
was strolling through New Braem or Grafendale.
Of course, that required ignoring the men in black coats.
They were everywhere, running errands for the M’Hael, going
to practice, working on the foundations of the Black Tower
structure itself. This place was still a work in progress. A group
of soldiers—bearing neither the sword pin nor the red-and-gold
Dragon—used the Power to blast a long trough in the ground
beside the road. It had been decided that the village needed a
canal.
Androl could see the weaves—mostly Earth—spinning around
the soldiers. In the Black Tower, you did as much with the
Power as you could. Always training, like men lifting stones to
build their strength. Light, how Logain and Taim pushed those
lads.
Androl moved out onto the newly graveled roadway. Much of
that gravel bore melted edges from where it had been blasted.
They had brought in boulders—through gateways, on weaves of
Air—then shattered them with explosive weaves. It had been
like a war zone, rocks shattering, spraying chips. With
Power—and training—like that, the Asha’man would be able to
reduce city walls to rubble.
Androl continued on his way. The Black Tower was a place
of strange sights, and melted gravel wasn’t nearly the strangest
of them. Neither were the soldiers tearing up ground, following
Androl’s own careful surveying. Lately, the strangest sight to
him was the children. They ran and played, jumping into the
trough left behind by the working soldiers, sliding down its
earthen sides, then scrambling back up.
Children. Playing in the holes created by saidin blasts. The
world was changing. Androl’s own gramma—so ancient she’d
lost every tooth in her mouth—had used stories of men
channeling to frighten him into bed on nights when he tried to
slip outside and count the stars. The darkness outside hadn’t
frightened him, nor had stories of Trollocs and Fades. But men
who could channel…that had terrified him.
Now he found himself here, grown into his middle years,
suddenly afraid of the dark but completely at peace with men
who could channel. He walked down the road, gravel crunching
beneath his boots. The children came scrambling up out of the
ditch and flocked around him. He idly brought out a handful
of candies, purchased on the last scouting mission.
“Two each,” he said sternly as dirty hands reached for the
candies. “And no shoving, mind you.” Hands went to mouths,
and the children gave him bobbed heads in thanks, calling him
“Master Genhald,” before racing away. They didn’t go back to
the trench, but invented a new game, running off toward the
fields to the east.
Androl brushed off his hands, smiling. Children were so
adaptable. Before them, centuries of tradition, terror and
superstition could melt away like butter left too long in the sun.
But it was good that they’d chosen to leave the trench. The
One Power could be unpredictable.
No. That wasn’t right. Saidin was very predictable. The men
who wielded it, however…well, they were a different story.
The soldiers halted their work and turned to meet him. He
wasn’t a full Asha’man, and didn’t merit a salute, but they
showed him respect. Too much. He wasn’t sure why they
deferred to him. He was no great man, particularly not here,
in the Black Tower.
Still, they nodded to him as he passed. Most of these were
among the men who had been recruited from the Two Rivers.
Sturdy lads and men, eager, though many were on the young
side. Half of them didn’t need to shave but once a week.
Androl walked up to them, then inspected their work, eyeing
the line of string he’d tied to small stakes. He nodded in
approval. “Angle is good, lads,” he said. “But keep the sides
steeper, if you can.”
“Yes, Master Genhald,” said the one leading the team. Jaim
Torfinn was his name, a spindly young man with dusty brown
hair. He still held the Power. That raging river of strength was
so enticing. Rare was the man who could release it without a
sense of loss.
The M’Hael encouraged them to keep hold of it, said that
holding it taught them to control it. But Androl had known
seductive sensations somewhat like saidin before—the
exhilaration of battle, the intoxication of rare drinks from the
Isles of the Sea Folk, the heady feeling of victory. A man could
be swept up in those feelings and lose control of himself,
forgetting who he was. And saidin was more seductive than
anything else he’d experienced.
He said nothing to Taim about his reservations. He had no
business lecturing the M’Hael.
“Here,” Androl said, “let me show you what I mean by
straight.” He took a deep breath, then emptied himself of
feeling. He used the old soldier’s trick to do that—he’d been
taught it by his first instructor in the sword, old one-armed
Garfin, whose heavy rural Illianer accent had been virtually
incomprehensible. Of course, Androl himself had a faint
Taraboner accent, he was told. It had faded over the years
since he’d last been home.
Within the nothing—the void—Androl could feel the raging
force that was saidin. He grabbed it as a man grabbed the
neck of a horse running wild, hoping to steer in some small
way but mostly just trying to hold on.
Saidin was wonderful. Yes, it was more powerful than any
intoxicant. It made the world more beautiful, more lush.
Holding that terrible Power, Androl felt as if he’d come to life,
leaving the dry husk of his former self behind. It threatened to
carry him away in its swift currents.
He worked quickly, weaving a tiny trickle of Earth—the best
he could manage, for Earth was where he was weakest—and
carefully shaved the sides of the canal. “If you leave too much
jutting out,” he explained as he worked, “then the canal flow
will stay muddy as it washes away the earth on the sides. The
straighter and more firm the sides, the better. You see?”
The soldiers nodded. Sweat had beaded on their brows, flakes
of dirt sticking to their foreheads and cheeks. But their black
coats were clean, particularly the sleeves. You could judge a
man’s respect for his uniform by whether or not he used the
sleeve to wipe his brow on a day like this. The Two Rivers
lads used handkerchiefs.
The more senior Asha’man, of course, rarely sweated at all. It
would take these lads more practice to get that down while
concentrating so much.
“Good men,” Androl said, standing up and glancing over
them. Androl laid a hand on Jaim’s shoulder. “You lads are
doing a fine job here. The Two Rivers, it grows men right.”
The lads beamed. It was good to have them, particularly
compared to the quality of men Taim had been recruiting
lately. The M’Hael’s scouts claimed they took whoever they
could find, yet why was it that most they brought back had
such angry, unsettling dispositions?
“Master Genhald?” asked one of the soldiers.
“Yes, Trost?” Androl asked.
“Have you…Have you heard anything of Master Logain?”
The others looked hopeful.
Androl shook his head. “He hasn’t returned from his scouting
mission. I’m sure he’ll be back soon.”
The lads nodded, though he could see that they were
beginning to worry. They had a right to. Androl had been
worrying for weeks now. Ever since Logain had left in the
night. Where had he gone? Why had he taken Donalo, Mezar
and Welyn—three of the most powerful Dedicated loyal to
him—along?
And now there were those Aes Sedai camped outside,
supposedly sent with authority from the Dragon to bond
Asha’man. Taim had given one of his half-smiles at that, the
kind that never reached his eyes, and told them the group
from the White Tower had first pick, since they’d come first.
The others waited, impatiently.
“The M’Hael,” one of the Two Rivers men said, expression
growing dark. “He—”
“Keep your heads on your shoulders,” Androl interrupted,
“and don’t make waves. Not yet. We wait for Logain.”
The men sighed, but nodded. Distracted by the conversation,
Androl almost didn’t notice when the shadows nearby began
creeping toward him. Shadows of men, lengthening in the
sunlight. Shadows within the trough. Shadows of rocks and
clefts in the earth. Slowly, deviously, they turned toward Androl.
Androl steeled himself, but couldn’t dispel the panic. This one
terror he could feel despite the void.
They came whenever he held saidin for too long. He
released it immediately, and the shadows reluctantly crept back
to their places.
The Two Rivers lads watched him, discomfort in their faces.
Could they see the wild cast to Androl’s eyes? Nobody spoke
of the…irregularities that afflicted men of the Black Tower. It
just wasn’t done. Like whispering dirty family secrets.
The taint was cleansed. These lads would never have to feel
the things that Androl did. Eventually, he and the others who
had been in the Tower before the cleansing would become
rarities. Light, but he couldn’t understand why anyone would
listen to him. Weak in the Power and insane to boot?
And the worst part was, he knew—deeply, down to his very
center—that those shadows were real. Not just some madness
concocted by his mind. They were real, and they would destroy
him if they reached him. They were real. They had to be.
Oh, Light, he thought, gritting his teeth. Either option is
terrifying. Either I’m insane or the darkness itself wants to
destroy me.
That was why he could no longer sleep at nights without
huddling in fear. Sometimes he could go hours holding the
Source without seeing the shadows. Sometimes only minutes.
He took a deep breath.
“All right,” he said, satisfied that his voice—at least—sounded
in control. “You best get back to work. Keep that slope moving
the right direction, mind you. We’ll have a mess and a half to
deal with if the water overflows and floods this area.”
As they obeyed, Androl left them, cutting back through the
village. Near the center stood the barracks, five large,
thick-stoned buildings for the soldiers, a dozen smaller buildings
for the Dedicated. Right now, this little village was the Black
Tower. That would change. A tower proper was being built
nearby, the foundation already dug.
He could visualize what the place might someday look like.
He’d once worked with a master architect—one of a dozen
different apprenticeships he’d held in a life that sometimes
seemed to have lasted too long. Yes, he could see it in his
mind’s eye. A domineering black stone tower, Power-built.
Strong, sturdy. At its base would be blockish square structures
with crenelated tops.
This village would grow to become a town, then a large city,
as vast as Tar Valon. The streets had been built to allow the
passing of several wagons at a time. New sections were
surveyed and laid. It bespoke vision and planning. The streets
themselves whispered of the Black Tower’s destiny.
Androl followed a worn pathway through the scrub grass.
Distant boom
s and snap
s echoed across the plains like the
sounds of a whip being cracked. Each man had his own
reasons for coming. Revenge, curiosity, desperation, lust for
power. Which was Androl’s reason? All four, perhaps?
He left the village, and eventually rounded a line of trees and
came to the practice range—a small canyon between two hills.
A line of men stood channeling Fire and Earth. The hills
needed to be leveled to make land for farming. An opportunity
to practice.
These men were mostly Dedicated. Weaves spun in the air,
much more skillful and powerful than those the Two Rivers
lads had used. These were streamlined, like hissing vipers or
striking arrows. Rocks exploded, and bursts of dirt sprayed into
the air. The blasting was done in an unpredictable pattern to
confuse and disorient foes. Androl could imagine a group of
cavalry thundering down that slope, only to be surprised by
exploding Earth. A single Dedicated could wipe out dozens of
riders in moments.
Androl noted with dissatisfaction that the working men stood
in two groups. The Tower was beginning to split and divide,
those loyal to Logain shunned and ostracized. On the right,
Canler, Emarin and Nalaam worked with focus and dedication,
joined by Jonneth Dowtry—the most skilled soldier among the
Two Rivers lads. On the left, a group of Taim’s cronies were
laughing among themselves. Their weaves were more wild, but
also much more destructive. Coteren lounged at the back,
leaning against a leafy hardgum tree and overseeing the work.
The workers took a break and called for a village boy to
bring water. Androl walked up, and Arlen Nalaam saw him
first, waving with a broad smile. The Domani man wore a thin
mustache. He was just shy of his thirtieth year, though he
sometimes acted much younger. Androl was still smarting from
the time Nalaam had put tree sap in his boots.
“Androl!” Nalaam called. “Come tell these uncultured louts
what a Retashen Dazer is!”
“A Retashen Dazer?” Androl said. “It’s a drink. Mix of mead
and ewe’s milk. Foul stuff.”
Nalaam looked at the others proudly. He had no pins on his
coat. He was only a soldier, but he should have been
advanced by now.
“You bragging about your travels again, Nalaam?” Androl
asked, unlacing the leather armguard.
“We Domani get around,” Nalaam said. “You know, the kind
of work my father does, spying for the Crown….”
“Last week you said your father was a merchant,” Canler
said. The sturdy man was the oldest of the group, his hair
graying, his square face worn from many years in the sun.
“He is,” Nalaam said. “That’s his front for being a spy!”
“Aren’t women the merchants in Arad Doman?” Jonneth
asked, rubbing his chin. He was a large, quiet man with a
round face. His entire family—his siblings, his parents, and his
grandfather Buel—had relocated to the village rather than letting
him come alone.
“Well, they’re the best,” Nalaam said, “and my mother is no
exception. We men know a thing or two, though. Besides, since
my mother was busy infiltrating the Tuatha’an, my father had
to take over the business.”
“Oh, now that’s just ridiculous,” Canler said with a scowl.
“Who would ever want to infiltrate a bunch of Tinkers?”
“To learn their secret recipes,” Nalaam said. “It’s said that a
Tinker can cook a pot of stew so fine that it will make you
leave house and home to travel with them. It’s true, I’ve tasted
it myself, and I had to be tied in a shed for three days before
the effect wore off.”
Canler sniffed. However, after a moment, the farmer added,
“So…did she find the recipe or not?”
Nalaam launched into another story, Canler and Jonneth
listening intently. Emarin stood to the side, looking on with
amusement—he was the other soldier in the group, bearing no
pins. He was an older man, with thin hair and wrinkles at his
eyes. His short white beard was trimmed to a point.
The distinguished man was something of an enigma; he’d
arrived with Logain one day, and had said nothing of his past.
He had a poised bearing and a delicate way of speaking. He
was a nobleman, that was certain. But unlike most other
noblemen in the Black Tower, Emarin made no attempt at
asserting his presumed authority. Many noblemen took weeks
to learn that once you joined the Black Tower, your outside
rank was meaningless. That made them sullen and snappish,
but Emarin had taken to life in the Tower immediately.
It took a nobleman with true dignity to follow the orders of a
commoner half his age without complaint. Emarin took a sip of
water from the serving boy, thanking the lad, then stepped up
to Androl. He nodded toward Nalaam, who was still talking to
the others. “That one has the heart of a gleeman.”
Androl grunted. “Maybe he can use it to earn some extra
coin. He still owes me a new pair of socks.”
“And you, my friend, have the soul of a scribe!” Emarin
laughed. “You never forget a thing, do you?”
Androl shrugged.
“How did you know what a Retashen Dazer was? I consider
myself quite educated in these matters, yet I’d heard not a
word of it.”
“I had one once,” Androl said. “Drank it on a bet.”
“Yes, but where?”
“Retash, of course.”
“But that’s leagues off shore, in a cluster of islands not even
the Sea Folk often visit!”
Androl shrugged again. He glanced over at Taim’s lackeys. A
village boy had brought them a basket of food from Taim,
though the M’Hael claimed not to play favorites. If Androl
asked, he’d find that a boy was supposed to have been sent
with food for the others, too. But that lad would have become
lost, or had forgotten, or made some other innocent mistake.
Taim would have someone whipped, and nothing would change.
“This division is troubling, my friend,” Emarin said softly.
“How can we fight for the Lord Dragon if we cannot make
peace among ourselves?”
Androl shook his head.
Emarin continued. “They say that no man favored of Logain
has had the Dragon pin in weeks. There are many, like
Nalaam there, who should have had the sword pin long
ago—but are denied repeatedly by the M’Hael. A House whose
members squabble for authority will never present a threat to
other Houses.”
“Wise words,” Androl said. “But what should we do? What
can we do? Taim is M’Hael, and Logain hasn’t returned yet.”
“Perhaps we could send someone for him,” Emarin said. “Or
maybe you could calm the others. I fear that some of them
are near to snapping, and if a fight breaks out, I have little
doubt who would see the rough side of Taim’s punishments.”
Androl frowned. “True. But why me? You’re far better with
words than I am, Emarin.”
Emarin chuckled. “Yes, but Logain trusts you, Androl. The
other men look to you.”
They shouldn’t, Androl thought. “I’ll see what I can think of.”
Nalaam was winding up for another story, but before he could
begin, Androl gestured to Jonneth, holding up the armguard. “I
saw your old one had cracked. Try this.”
Jonneth’s face brightened as he took the armguard. “You’re
amazing, Androl! I didn’t think anyone had noticed. It’s a silly
thing, I know, but…” His smile broadened and he hurried to a
nearby tree, beside which sat some of the men’s equipment,
including Jonneth’s bow. These Two Rivers men liked to have
them handy.
Jonneth returned, stringing the bow. He put on the
armguard. “Fits like a dream!” he said, and Androl felt himself
smiling. Small things. They could mean so much.
Jonneth took aim and launched an arrow, the shaft streaking
into the air, bowstring snapping against the armguard. The
arrow soared far, striking a tree on a hill better than two
hundred paces away.
Canler whistled. “Ain’t ever seen anything like those bows of
yours, Jonneth. Never in my life.” They were fellow Andorans,
though Canler had come from a town much closer to Caemlyn.
Jonneth looked at his shot critically, then drew again—fletching
to cheek—and loosed. The shaft fell true and hit the very same
tree. Androl would guess that the shafts were less than two
handspans apart.
Canler whistled again.
“My father trained on one of those,” Nalaam noted. “Learned
the art from a Two Rivers man whom he rescued from
drowning in Illian. Has the bowstring as a memento.”
Canler raised an eyebrow, but he seemed taken with the tale
at the same time. Androl just chuckled, shaking his head.
“Mind if I have a go, Jonneth? I’m a pretty dead shot with a
Tairen bow, and they’re a little longer than most.”
“Surely,” the lanky man said, unstrapping the armguard and
handing over the bow.
Androl donned the armguard and lifted the bow. It was of
black yew, and there wasn’t as much spring to the string as
he was used to. Jonneth handed him an arrow and Androl
mimicked the man’s pull, drawing to his cheek.
“Light!” he said at the weight of the pull. “Those arms of
yours are deceptively small, Jonneth. How do you manage to
aim? I can barely keep it steady!”
Jonneth laughed as Androl’s arms trembled, and he finally
loosed, unable to keep the bow drawn for a breath longer. The
arrow hit the ground far off target. He handed the bow to
Jonneth.
“That was fairly good, Androl,” Jonneth said. “A lot of men
can’t even get the string back. Give me ten years, and I could
have you shooting like one born in the Two Rivers!”
“I’ll stick to shortbows for now,” Androl said. “You’d never be
able to shoot a monster like that from horseback.”
“I wouldn’t need to!” Jonneth said.
“What if you were being chased?”
“If there were fewer than five of them,” Jonneth said, “I’d
take them all down with this before they got to me. If there
were more than five, then what am I doing shooting at them?
I should be running like the Dark One himself was after me.”
The other men chuckled, though Androl caught Emarin eyeing
him. Probably wondering how Androl knew to shoot a bow
from horseback. He was a keen one, that nobleman. Androl
would have to watch himself.
“And what is this?” a voice asked. “You do be trying to learn
to shoot a bow, pageboy? Is this so you can actually defend
yourself?”
Androl gritted his teeth, turning as Coteren sauntered up. He
was a bulky man, his black, oily hair kept long and loose. It
hung around a blunt face with pudgy cheeks. His eyes were
focused, dangerous. He smiled. The smile of a cat that had
found a rodent to play with.
Androl quietly undid the armguard, handing it to Jonneth.
Coteren was full Asha’man, a personal friend of the M’Hael. He
outranked everyone here by a long stride.
“The M’Hael will hear of this,” Coteren said. “You do be
ignoring your lessons. You have no need for arrows or
bows—not when you can kill with the Power!”
“We aren’t ignoring anything,” Nalaam said stubbornly.
“Quiet, lad,” Androl said. “Mind your tongue.”
Coteren laughed. “Listen to the pageboy, you lot. The M’Hael
will hear of your impudence also.” He focused on Androl.
“Seize the Source.”
Androl obliged reluctantly. The sweetness of saidin flowed into
him, and he glanced nervously to the side. There was no sign
of the shadows.
“So pathetic,” Coteren said. “Destroy that stone over there.”
It was far too large for him. But he’d dealt with bullies
before, and Coteren was a bully of the most dangerous
type—one with power and authority. The best thing to do was
to mind. Embarrassment was a small punishment. That was
something few bullies seemed to understand.
Androl wove the requisite weave of Fire and Earth, striking at
the large stone. The thin weave held almost all of the Power
he could manage, but it only flaked a few chips off the large
stone.
Coteren laughed heartily, as did the group of Dedicated eating
beneath the nearby tree. “Bloody ashes, but you’re useless!”
Coteren said. “Forget what I said earlier, pageboy! You need
that bow!”
Androl released the One Power. Coteren had had his laugh;
he would be satisfied. Unfortunately, Androl felt men seize the
Source behind him. Jonneth, Canler and Nalaam stepped up
beside Androl, each of them filled with the One Power and
bristling with anger.
The men who had been eating stood up, each holding the
Source as well. There were twice as many of them as there
were of Androl’s friends. Coteren smirked.
Androl eyed Canler and the others. “Now lads,” he said,
raising a hand, “Asha’man Coteren was just doing what the
M’Hael ordered him. He’s trying to make me mad so I’ll push
myself.”
The two groups hesitated. The intensity of their locked gazes
rivaled that of the Power within them. Then Jonneth released
the Source. This caused Nalaam to do likewise, and finally gruff
Canler turned away. Coteren laughed.
“I don’t like this,” Canler muttered as the group of them
walked off. He shot a glance over his shoulder. “Don’t like it at
all. Why’d you stop us, Androl?”
“Because they’d have made rubble of us faster than you can
curse, Canler,” Androl snapped. “Light, man! I can barely
channel worth a bean, and Emarin hasn’t been here a month
yet. Jonneth’s learning fast, but we all know he’s never actually
fought with the Power before, and half of Coteren’s men saw
battle beneath the Lord Dragon! You really think you and
Nalaam could handle ten men, virtually on your own?”
Canler continued to bristle, muttering, but let the argument
drop.
“Makashak Na famalashten morkase,” Nalaam mumbled, “delf
takaksaki mere!” He laughed to himself, eyes wild. It wasn’t a
language Androl knew—it wasn’t the Old Tongue, that was for
certain. It probably wasn’t even a language at all.
None of the others said anything. Nalaam occasionally cackled
to himself in gibberish. If asked about it, he’d claim he’d
spoken in plain ordinary words. The outburst seemed to
discomfit Emarin and Jonneth a great deal. They hadn’t ever
seen friends go mad and kill those around them. Light send
that they’d never have to see it, now. Whatever else Androl
thought of the Lord Dragon for leaving them alone, the
cleansing earned al’Thor redemption. Channeling was safe now.
Or, at least, it was safer. Channeling would never be safe,
particularly now with Taim pushing them.
“More and more people are taking those burning personal
lessons from Taim,” Nalaam muttered as they walked to the
shade of the trees. “Nensen’s success has the men eager.
We’ve lost a good dozen to Taim’s side in the last few weeks.
Soon there won’t be anyone left besides us here. I’m afraid to
talk to half the men I used to trust.”
“Norley is trustworthy,” Canler said. “Evin Hardlin, too.”
“That’s a small list,” Nalaam said. “Too small.”
“The Two Rivers men are with us,” Jonneth said. “To a
man.”
“Still a small list,” Nalaam said. “And not a full Asha’man
among us.”
They all looked to Androl. He glanced back at Taim’s lackeys,
laughing among themselves again.
“What, Androl?” Nalaam asked. “Not going to chastise us for
talking like that?”
“Like what?” Androl asked, looking back at them.
“Like it’s us against them.”
“I didn’t want you lads to get yourselves killed or imprisoned,
but that doesn’t mean I don’t see a problem.” He glanced
back at them. “Aye, there’s trouble here, brewing like a storm.”
“The men who take Taim’s private lessons learn too quickly,”
Nalaam said. “Nensen was barely powerful enough to be
considered for Dedicated just a short time ago. Now he’s full
Asha’man. Something very strange is going on. And those Aes
Sedai. Why did Taim agree to let them bond us? You know
he’s protected all of his favorites by stopping the Aes Sedai
from choosing any man with the Dragon pin. Burn me, but I
don’t know what I’ll do if one chooses me. I’m not going to
be put on some Aes Sedai’s string.”
There were several mutters about that.
“Taim’s men spread rumors among the newcomers,” Jonneth
said softly. “They talk about the Lord Dragon, and how he
drove good men to turn traitor. They say he’s abandoned us,
and that he’s gone mad. The M’Hael doesn’t want those
rumors pointing back to him, but burn me if he isn’t the
source of them all.”
“Maybe he’s right,” Canler said. The others looked at him
sharply, and the leathery man scowled. “I’m not saying that
I’m going to go jump into Taim’s camp. But the Lord Dragon?
What has he done for us? Seems like he’s forgotten about this
place. Maybe he is mad.”
“He’s not,” Emarin said, shaking his head. “I met him just
before I came here.”
The others looked at him, surprised.
“He impressed me,” Emarin said. “Young, but with a powerful
will. I trust him. Light! I barely spoke with him a half-dozen
times, but I trust him.”
The others slowly nodded.
“Burn me,” Canler said, “I suppose that’s good enough for
me. But I wish he’d listen! I heard Logain cursing that the
Lord Dragon won’t hear him when he gives warnings about
Taim.”
“And if we gave him evidence?” Jonneth asked. “What if we
could find something that proves that Taim is up to no good?”
“Something is strange about Nensen,” Nalaam repeated. “And
that Kash. Where did he even come from, and how did he
grow so powerful so quickly? What if, when Logain returned,
we had information for him. Or if we could take it to the Lord
Dragon directly…”
The group turned to Androl. Why did they look to him, the
weakest of them? All he could do was create gateways. That
was where Coteren’s nickname for Androl had come from.
Pageboy. The only thing he was good for was delivering
messages, taking people places.
But the others looked to him. For one reason or another,
they looked to him.
“All right,” Androl said. “Let’s see what we can find. Bring
Evin, Hardlin and Norley into this but don’t tell anyone else,
not even the other Two Rivers lads. Don’t rile Taim or his
men…but if you do find something, bring it to me. And I’ll see
if I can find a way to contact Logain, or at least find where
he went.”
Each man nodded, somber. Light help us if we’re wrong,
Androl thought, looking back at Taim’s favorites. And Light
help us more if we’re right.

The hair on Min’s neck rose as she held the crystal sword.
Callandor. She’d heard stories of this weapon since she was a
child, wild tales of distant Tear and the strange Sword That Is
Not a Sword. Now she held it in her own fingers.
It was lighter than she’d expected. Its crystalline length caught
and played with the lamplight. It seemed to shimmer too much,
the light inside changing even when she didn’t move. The
crystal was smooth, but warm. It almost felt alive.
Rand stood in front of her, looking down at the weapon.
They were in their rooms inside the Stone of Tear,
accompanied by Cadsuane, Narishma, Merise, Naeff and two
Maidens.
Rand reached out, touching the weapon. She glanced at him,
and a viewing sprang to life above him. A glowing sword,
Callandor, being gripped in a black hand. She gasped.
“What did you see?” Rand asked softly.
“
Callandor, held in a fist. The hand looks to be made of
onyx.”
“Any idea what it means?”
She shook her head.
“We should hide it away again,” Cadsuane said. She wore
brown and green today, earthy colors lightened by her golden
hair ornaments. She stood with arms folded, back straight.
“Phaw! Getting the object out now is foolhardy, boy.”
“Your objection is noted,” Rand said. He took the sa’angreal
from Min, then slid it over his shoulder into a sheath on his
back. At his side, he once again wore the ancient sword with
the red-and-gold dragons painted on the sheath. He’d said
before that he considered that to be a kind of symbol. It
represented the past to him, and Callandor
—somehow—represented the future.
“Rand,” Min said, taking his arm. “My research…remember,
Callandor seems to have a deeper flaw than we’ve discovered.
This viewing only reinforces what I said before. I worry it may
be used against you.”
“I suspect that it will,” Rand said. “Everything else in this
world has been used against me. Narishma, a gateway, please.
We’ve kept the Borderlanders waiting long enough.”
The Asha’man nodded, bells in his hair tinkling.
Rand turned to Naeff. “Naeff, there has still been no word
from the Black Tower?”
“No, my Lord,” the tall Asha’man said.
“I have been unable to Travel there,” Rand said. “That
implies great trouble, worse than I had feared. Use this weave.
It can disguise you. Travel to a place a day’s ride outside, and
ride in, hiding yourself. See what you can discover. Help if you
can, and when you find Logain and those loyal to him, deliver
him a message for me.”
“What message, my Lord?”
Rand looked distant. “Tell them that I was wrong. Tell them
that we’re not weapons. We’re men. Perhaps it will help. Take
care. This could be dangerous. Bring me word. I will need to
fix things there, but I could easily stumble into a trap more
dangerous than any I’ve avoided so far. Problems…so many
problems that need fixing. And only one of me. Go in my
place, Naeff, for now. I need information.”
“I…Yes, my Lord.” He seemed confused, but he ducked out
of the room to obey.
Rand took a deep breath, then rubbed the stump of his left
arm. “Let’s go.”
“Are you certain you don’t want to bring more people?” Min
asked.
“Yes,” Rand said. “Cadsuane, be ready to open a gateway
and get us out if needed.”
“We’re going into Far Madding, boy,” Cadsuane said. “Surely
you haven’t forgotten that we are prevented from touching the
Source while there.”
Rand smiled. “And you’re wearing a full paralis-net in your
hair, which includes a Well. I’m certain you keep it full, and
that should be enough to create a single gateway.”
Cadsuane’s face grew expressionless. “I’ve never heard of a
paralis-net.”
“Cadsuane Sedai,” Rand said softly. “Your net has a few
ornaments I don’t recognize—I suspect it is a Breaking-era
creation. But I was there when the first ones were designed,
and I wore the original male version.”
The room fell still.
“Well, boy,” Cadsuane finally said. “You—”
“Are you ever going to give up that affectation, Cadsuane
Sedai?” Rand asked. “Calling me boy? I no longer mind,
though it does feel odd. I was four hundred years old on the
day I died during the Age of Legends. I suspect that would
make you my junior by several decades at the least. I show
you respect. Perhaps it would be appropriate for you to return
it. If you wish, you may call me Rand Sedai. I am, so far as I
know, the only male Aes Sedai still alive who was properly
raised but who never turned to the Shadow.”
Cadsuane paled visibly.
Rand’s smile turned kindly. “You wished to come in and
dance with the Dragon Reborn, Cadsuane. I am what I need
to be. Be comforted—you face the Forsaken, but have one as
ancient as they at your side.” He turned away from her, eyes
growing distant. “Now, if only great age really were an
indication of great wisdom. As easy to wish that the Dark One
would simply let us be.”
He took Min by the arm, and together they walked through
Narishma’s gateway. Beyond, a small cluster of Maidens waited
inside a wooded clearing, guarding a group of horses. Min
climbed into her saddle, noting how reserved Cadsuane looked.
As well she should. When Rand spoke like that, it troubled Min
more than she wanted to admit.
They rode out of the small thicket, down toward Far
Madding, an impressive city set on an island in the middle of a
lake. A large army—flying hundreds of banners—spread out
around the lake.
“It’s always been a city of importance, you know,” Rand said
from beside Min, his eyes distant. “The Guardians are newer,
but the city was here long ago. Aren Deshar, Aren Mador, Far
Madding. Always a thorn in our side, Aren Deshar was. The
enclave of the Incastar—those afraid of progress, afraid of
wonder. Turns out they had a right to be afraid. How I wish I
had listened to Gilgame…”
“Rand?” Min said softly.
It drew him out of his reverie. “Yes?”
“Is it really as you said? Are you four centuries old?”
“I’m nearly four and a half, I suppose. Do my years in this
Age add to those I had before?” He looked at her. “You’re
worried, aren’t you? That I’m no longer me, the man you
knew, the foolish sheepherder?”
“You’ve got all of this in your mind, so much past
.”
“Memories, only,” Rand said.
“But you’re him, too. You talk like you were the one who
tried to seal the Bore. Like you knew the Forsaken personally.”
Rand rode in silence for a time. “I suppose I am him. But
Min, what you’re missing is this: I may be him now, but he
was always me as well. I was always him. I’m not going to
change just because I remember—I was the same. I’m me.
And I always have been me.”
“Lews Therin was mad.”
“At the end,” Rand said. “And yes, he made mistakes. I
made mistakes. I grew arrogant, desperate. But there’s a
difference this time. A great one.”
“What difference?”
He smiled. “This time, I was raised better.”
Min found herself smiling as well.
“You know me, Min. Well, I promise you, I feel more like
myself now than I have in months. I feel more like myself
than I ever did as Lews Therin, if that makes any kind of
sense. It’s because of Tam, because of the people around me.
You, Perrin, Nynaeve, Mat, Aviendha, Elayne, Moiraine. He tried
very hard to break me. I think if I’d been the same as I was
so long ago, he would have succeeded.”
They rode across the meadow surrounding Far Madding. As
everywhere else, the green here had departed, leaving yellow
and brown. It was getting worse and worse.
Pretend that it slumbers, Min told herself. The land isn’t
dead. It’s waiting through the winter. A winter of storms
and war.
Narishma hissed softly, riding behind. Min glanced at him.
The Asha’man’s face had gone hard. Apparently, they’d passed
inside the bubble of the Guardian’s influence. Rand gave no
indication he’d noticed. He didn’t seem to be having the
trouble with sickness when he channeled any longer, which
relieved her. Or was he just covering it?
She turned her mind to the task at hand. The Borderlander
armies had never explained why they’d defied custom and logic
by marching south to find Rand. They were needed
desperately. Rand’s intervention at Maradon had saved what
was left of the city, but if that sort of thing was happening all
across the border with the Blight….
Twenty soldiers—lances upheld with narrow, blood-red banners
flapping from them like streamers—intercepted Rand’s group
long before it reached the army. Rand stopped and let them
approach.
“Rand al’Thor,” one of the men announced. “We are
representatives of the Unity of the Border. We will provide
escort.”
Rand nodded, and the procession started forward again, this
time with guards.
“They didn’t call you Lord Dragon,” Min whispered to Rand.
He nodded thoughtfully. Perhaps the Borderlanders did not
believe he was the Dragon Reborn.
“Do not be arrogant here, Rand al’Thor,” Cadsuane said,
trotting up to ride beside him. “But do not back down. Most
Borderlanders will respond to strength when they see it.”
So. Cadsuane called Rand by name, instead of naming him
“boy.” It seemed a victory, and it made Min smile.
“I will have that gateway ready,” Cadsuane continued more
softly. “But it will be very small. The Well will only give me
enough to make one we’d have to crawl through. We shouldn’t
need it. These people will fight for you. They will want to fight
for you. Only bumbling foolishness could keep them from it.”
“There is more to it than that, Cadsuane Sedai,” Rand
replied, his voice hushed. “Something drove them southward.
This is a challenge, one I am uncertain how to meet. But your
advice is appreciated.”
Cadsuane nodded. Eventually, Min picked out a line of people
waiting at the forefront of the army. There were thousands of
soldiers behind, standing in rows. Saldaeans, with their bowed
legs. Shienarans in topknots. Arafellin, each soldier with two
swords strapped to his back. Kandori, with forked beards.
The group at the head stood on the ground, without mounts.
They wore fine clothing. Two women and two men, all with
what were obviously Aes Sedai at their sides, some with an
attendant or two behind.
“The one at the front is Queen Ethenielle,” Cadsuane
whispered. “She is a stern woman, but fair. She is known for
meddling in the affairs of the southern nations, and I suspect
the others will let her take the lead today. The handsome man
beside her is Paitar Nachiman, King of Arafel.”
“Handsome?” Min asked, inspecting the balding older Arafellin.
“Him?”
“It depends on one’s perspective, child,” Cadsuane said
without missing a beat. “He was once known widely for his
face, and he is still known for his sword. Beside him is King
Easar Togita of Shienar.”
“So sad,” Rand said softly. “Who did he lose?”
Min frowned. Easar didn’t look particularly sad to her.
Solemn, perhaps.
“He’s a Borderlander,” Cadsuane said. “He’s fought the
Trollocs all his life; I’d suspect he’s lost many a person dear to
him. His wife did die some years back. He’s said to have the
soul of a poet, but he is an austere man. If you could earn
his respect, it would mean much.”
“The last one is Tenobia, then,” Rand said, rubbing his chin.
“Still wish I had Bashere with us.” Bashere had said that his
face might fuel Tenobia’s anger, and Rand had listened to
reason on that count.
“Tenobia,” Cadsuane said, “is a wildfire. Young, impertinent
and reckless. Don’t let her draw you into an argument.”
Rand nodded. “Min?”
“Tenobia has a spear hovering over her head,” Min said.
“Bloody, but shining in the light. Ethenielle will soon be wed—I
see that by white doves. She plans to do something dangerous
today, so be careful. The other two have various swords,
shields and arrows hovering about them. Both will fight soon.”
“In the Last Battle?” Rand asked.
“I don’t know,” she admitted. “It could be here, today.”
Their escort led them up to the four monarchs. Rand slid
out of the saddle, patting Tai’daishar on the neck as the horse
snorted. Min moved to dismount, as did Narishma, but Rand
held up a hand to stop them.
“Blasted fool,” Cadsuane muttered from beside Min, low
enough that nobody else could hear. “He asks me to be ready
to get him out, then leaves us?”
“He likely meant that you should get me away,” Min said
softly. “Knowing him, he’s more worried about me than
himself.” She paused. “Blasted fool.”
Cadsuane shot her a glance, then smiled slightly before
turning back to watch Rand.
He stepped up to the four monarchs and stopped, raising his
arms to the sides, as if to ask, “What is it you wish of me?”
Ethenielle took the lead, as Cadsuane had guessed. She was a
plump woman, her dark hair pulled away from her face and
tied at the back. She strode up to Rand, a man walking beside
her and carrying a sheathed sword in his arm, hilt pointed
toward her.
Nearby, the Maidens rustled. They stepped up beside Rand.
As usual, they assumed that commands to stay back didn’t
include them.
Ethenielle raised a hand and slapped Rand across the face.
Narishma cursed. The Maidens raised their veils and drew
spears. Min nudged her horse forward, breaking through the
line of guards.
“Stop!” Rand said, raising his hand. He turned, looking at the
Maidens.
Min stilled her mare, patting her on the neck. She was
skittish, as might be expected. The Maidens reluctantly backed
down, though Cadsuane did take the opportunity to move her
horse up beside Min’s.
Rand turned back to Ethenielle and rubbed his face. “I hope
that’s some traditional Kandori greeting, Your Majesty.”
She raised an eyebrow, then gestured to the side, and King
Easar of Shienar stepped up to Rand. The man backhanded
Rand across the mouth, the force of it causing Rand to
stumble.
Rand righted himself, again waving the Maidens down. He
met Easar’s eyes. A trickle of blood ran down Rand’s chin.
The Shienaran studied him for a moment, then nodded and
stepped back.
Tenobia came next. She slapped Rand with her left hand, a
strong blow that cracked in the air. Min felt a flash of pain
from Rand. Tenobia shook her hand afterward.
King Paitar came last. The aging Arafellin with only a fringe
of hair walked with his hands behind his back, contemplative.
He stepped up to Rand and reached over and dabbed at the
blood on Rand’s cheek. Then he backhanded Rand with a
blow that sent him to his knees, a spray of blood flying from
his mouth.
Min couldn’t sit by any longer. “Rand!” she said, jumping
down from her saddle and running to him. She reached his
side, steadying him while glaring at the monarchs. “How dare
you! He came to you peacefully.”
“Peacefully?” Paitar said. “No, young woman, he did not come
to this world in peace. He has consumed the land with terror,
chaos and destruction.”
“As the prophecies said that he would,” Cadsuane said,
walking up as Min helped Rand back to his feet. “You lay
before him the burdens of an entire Age. You cannot hire a
man to rebuild your house, then reproach him when he must
knock down a wall to do the job.”
“That presumes that he is the Dragon Reborn,” Tenobia said,
folding her arms. “We—”
She cut off as Rand stood, then carefully slid Callandor from
its sheath, glittering blade rasping. He held it forth. “Do you
deny this, Queen Tenobia, Shield of the North and Sword of
the Blightborder, High Seat of House Kazadi? Will you look
upon this weapon and call me a false Dragon?”
That quieted her. To the side, Easar nodded. Behind them,
ranks of silent troops watched with lances, pikes and shields
held high. As if in salute. Or as if in preparation to attack. Min
looked up, and could faintly make out people lining the walls of
Far Madding to watch.
“Let us proceed,” Easar said. “Ethenielle?”
“Very well,” the woman said. “I will say this, Rand al’Thor.
Even if you do prove to be the Dragon Reborn, you have
much to answer for.”
“You may take your price from my skin, Ethenielle,” Rand
said softly, sliding Callandor back into its sheath. “But only
once the Dark One has had his day with me.”
“Rand al’Thor,” Paitar said. “I have a question for you. How
you answer will determine the outcome of this day.”
“What kind of question?” Cadsuane demanded.
“Cadsuane, please,” Rand said, holding up his hand. “Lord
Paitar, I see it in your eyes. You know that I am the Dragon
Reborn. Is this question necessary?”
“It is vital, Lord al’Thor,” Paitar replied. “It drove us here,
though my allies did not know it from the start. I have always
believed you to be the Dragon Reborn. That made my quest
here even more vital.”
Min frowned. The aging soldier reached down to his sword
hilt, as if ready to draw. The Maidens grew more alert. With a
start, Min realized Paitar was still standing close to Rand. Too
close.
He could have that sword out and swinging for Rand’s
neck in an eyeblink, she realized. Paitar placed himself there
to be ready to strike.
Rand didn’t break his gaze from the monarch. “Ask your
question.”
“How did Tellindal Tirraso die?”
“Who?” Min asked, looking at Cadsuane. The Aes Sedai
shook her head, confused.
“How do you know that name?” Rand demanded.
“Answer the question,” Easar said, hand on his hilt, body
tense. Around them, ranks of men prepared themselves.
“She was a clerk,” Rand said. “During the Age of Legends.
Demandred, when he came for me after founding the Eighty
and One…She fell in the fighting, lightning from the sky…Her
blood on my hands…How do you know that name!
”
Ethenielle looked to Easar, then to Tenobia, then finally to
Paitar. He nodded, then closed his eyes, letting out a sigh that
sounded relieved. He took his hand from his sword.
“Rand al’Thor,” Ethenielle said, “Dragon Reborn. Would you
kindly sit down and speak with us? We will answer your
questions.”
“Why have I never heard of this so-called prophecy?”
Cadsuane asked.
“Its nature required secrecy,” King Paitar said. They all sat on
cushions in a large tent in the middle of the Borderlander
army. It made Cadsuane’s shoulders itch, being surrounded like
this, but the fool boy—he would always be a fool boy, no
matter how old he was—looked perfectly at peace.
Thirteen Aes Sedai waited outside the tent, which wasn’t large
enough for them all. Thirteen. That hadn’t made al’Thor blink.
What man who could channel would sit amid thirteen Aes
Sedai and not sweat?
He’s changed, Cadsuane told herself. You’re just going to
have to accept that. Not that he didn’t need her anymore.
Men like him grew overly confident. A few little successes, and
he’d trip over his own feet and land in some predicament.
But…well, she was proud of him. Grudgingly proud. A little.
“It was given by an Aes Sedai of my own family line,” Paitar
continued. The square-faced man sipped a small cup of tea.
“My ancestor, Reo Myershi, was the only one who heard it.
He ordered the words preserved, passed from monarch to
monarch, for this day.”
“Speak them to me,” Rand said. “Please.”
“I see him before you!” Paitar quoted. “Him, the one who
lives many lives, the one who gives deaths, the one who raises
mountains. He will break what he must break, but first he
stands here, before our king. You will bloody him! Measure his
restraint. He speaks! How was the fallen slain? Tellindal Tirraso,
murdered by his hand, the darkness that came the day after
the light. You must ask, and you must know your fate. If he
cannot answer…”
He trailed off, falling silent.
“What?” Min asked.
“If he cannot answer,” Paitar said, “then you will be lost. You
will bring his end swiftly, so that the final days may have their
storm. So that Light may not be consumed by he who was to
have preserved it. I see him. And I weep.”
“You came to murder him, then,” Cadsuane said.
“To test him,” Tenobia said. “Or so we decided, once Paitar
told us of the prophecy.”
“You don’t know how close you came to doom,” Rand said
softly. “If I had come to you but a short time earlier, I’d have
returned those slaps with balefire.”
“Inside the Guardian?” Tenobia sniffed disdainfully.
“The Guardian blocks the One Power,” Rand whispered. “The
One Power only.”
What does he mean by that? Cadsuane thought, frowning.
“We knew well the risk,” Ethenielle said proudly. “I demanded
the right to slap you first. Our armies had orders to attack if
we fell.”
“My family has analyzed the words of the prophecy a
hundred times over,” Paitar said. “The meaning seemed clear.
It was our task to test the Dragon Reborn. To see if he could
be trusted to go to the Last Battle.”
“Only a month earlier,” Rand said. “I wouldn’t have had the
memories to answer you. This was a foolish gambit. If you had
killed me, then all would have been lost.”
“A gamble,” Paitar said evenly. “Perhaps another would have
risen in your stead.”
“No,” Rand said. “This prophecy was like the others. A
declaration of what might happen, not advice.”
“I see it differently, Rand al’Thor,” Paitar said. “And the
others agreed with me.”
“It should be noted,” Ethenielle said, “that I didn’t come
south because of this prophecy. My goal was to see if I could
bring some sense to the world. And then…” She grimaced.
“What?” Cadsuane asked, finally sipping her tea. It tasted
good, as it usually did near al’Thor these days.
“The storms,” Tenobia said. “The snow stopped us. And then,
finding you proved more difficult than we’d assumed. These
gateways. Can you teach them to our Aes Sedai?”
“I will have your Aes Sedai taught in return for a promise,”
Rand said. “You will swear to me. I have need of you.”
“We are sovereigns,” Tenobia snapped. “I’m not going to bow
to you as quickly as my uncle did. We have to speak about
that, by the way.”
“Our oaths are to the lands we protect,” Easar said.
“As you wish,” Rand said, rising. “I once gave you an
ultimatum. I phrased it poorly, and I regret that, but I remain
your only path to the Last Battle. Without me, you will remain
here, hundreds of leagues from those lands you swore to
protect.” He nodded to each of them, then helped Min to her
feet. “Tomorrow, I meet with the monarchs of the world. After
that, I am going to go to Shayol Ghul and break the remaining
seals on the Dark One’s prison. Good day.”
Cadsuane didn’t rise. She sat, sipping her tea. The four
seemed astounded. Well, the boy certainly had picked up an
understanding of the dramatic.
“Wait!” Paitar finally sputtered, rising. “You’re going to do
what?”
Rand turned. “I’m going to shatter the seals, Lord Paitar. I’m
going to ‘break what he must break’ as your own prophecy
says I must. You cannot stop me, not when those words
prove what I will do. Earlier, I stepped in to prevent Maradon
from falling. It was near to it, Tenobia. The walls are shattered,
your troops bloodied. With help, I was able to save it. Barely.
Your countries need you. And so, you have two choices. Swear
to me, or sit here and let everyone else fight in your place.”
Cadsuane sipped her tea. That was going a little too far.
“I’ll leave you to discuss my offer,” Rand said. “I can spare
one hour—though, before you start your deliberation, could you
send for someone on my behalf? There is a man in your
army named Hurin. I would like to apologize to him.”
They still looked stunned. Cadsuane rose to go speak with
the sisters waiting outside; she knew a few of them, and
needed to feel out the others. She didn’t worry about what the
Borderlanders would decide. Al’Thor had them. Another army
beneath his banner. I didn’t think he’d manage this one.
One more day and it all began. Light, but she hoped that
they were ready.