"Of the viewpoints in the last books, I had the most to do with Perrin, as RJ left very, very little about what to do with him.
But if it was Perrin it was me. He had nothing on him except leaving Malden and being in the Last Battle, so I had to fill in everything in between."

I asked Sanderson about his storyline in the three final books, and he told me that Jordan left basically no notes on Perrin.

He left about a hundred written pages and another hundred pages of notes specifically for the last book. It really depends on the given scene. In The Gathering Storm, if it was [Egwene] it was either written by him or from his notes and if it was Rand it was mostly me. In Towers of Midnight, if it was Mat it was probably from his notes or written by him, he wrote the entire Tower of Ghenjei sequence. But if it was Perrin it was me. He had nothing on him except leaving Malden and being in the Last Battle, so I had to fill in everything in between. In the final book, meeting at the Fields of Merrilor was him and the very last chapter, which became the epilogue, was him and a lot of the rest was me.

"There is some I had to add. In The Gathering Storm, Egwene is more RJ and Rand is more me. In Towers of Midnight, Perrin me, Mat RJ. But in all cases, there's a lot of RJ in everything and some of me in everything too. It's not clear-cut."

"How about a non-spoilery Easter egg instead? Each of the three prologues has had at least one complete scene written by RJ before he died. When I split the books, I split the prologue in a way that at least one of those scenes went into each book. Prologues were important to RJ, particularly in the later books, and I wanted his stamp to be on each one of the three prologues."

AUSTIN MOORE
The scene with the Borderland towers in Towers of Midnight prologue was all RJ correct?
BRANDON SANDERSON
"Yes. I've confirmed that before. Good eye, if you spotted it on your own."

"He wrote most of the Tower of Ghenjei scenes in that book before he passed away."

"In answer to the second question, he left LOTS of notes behind. He wrote complete scenes in places, dictated other scenes, left piles of notes and materials. The prologue was almost all completed by him (that will be split half in this book, half in the next.) The ending scenes were written by him as well. In the middle, there are a lot of scene outlines as well." - Seems to be about The Gathering Storm, dated Jul 2009 so timing matches