“I have seen the end, and have heard it named. The Night of Sorrows, the True
Desolation. The Everstorm.”
—Collected on the 1st of Nanes, 1172, 15 seconds pre-death. Subject was
a darkeyed youth of unknown origin.
Shallan had not expected Jasnah Kholin to be so beautiful.
It was a stately, mature beauty—as one might find in the portrait of
some historical scholar. Shallan realized that she’d naively been expecting
Jasnah to be an ugly spinster, like the stern matrons who had tutored her
years ago. How else could one picture a heretic well into her mid-thirties
and still unmarried?
Jasnah was nothing like that. She was tall and slender, with clear skin,
narrow black eyebrows, and thick, deep onyx hair. She wore part of it up,
wrapped around a small, scroll-shaped golden ornament with two long
hairpins holding it in place. The rest tumbled down behind her neck in
small, tight curls. Even twisted and curled as it was, it came down to
Jasnah’s shoulders—if left unbound, it would be as long as Shallan’s hair,
reaching past the middle of her back.
She had a squarish face and discriminating pale violet eyes. She was
listening to a man dressed in robes of burnt orange and white, the
Kharbranthian royal colors. Brightness Kholin was several fingers taller
than the man—apparently, the Alethi reputation for height was no
exaggeration. Jasnah glanced at Shallan, noting her, then returned to her
conversation.
Stormfather! This woman was the sister of a king. Reserved,
statuesque, dressed immaculately in blue and silver. Like Shallan’s dress,
Jasnah’s buttoned up the sides and had a high collar, though Jasnah had a
much fuller chest than Shallan. The skirts were loose below the waist,
falling generously to the floor. Her sleeves were long and stately, and the
left one was buttoned up to hide her safehand.
On her freehand was a distinctive piece of jewelry: two rings and a
bracelet connected by several chains, holding a triangular group of
gemstones across the back of the hand. A Soulcaster—the word was used
for both the people who performed the process and the fabrial that made
it possible.
Shallan edged into the room, trying to get a better look at the large,
glowing gemstones. Her heart began to beat a little faster. The Soulcaster
looked identical to the one she and her brothers had found in the inside
pocket of her father’s coat.
Jasnah and the man in robes began walking in Shallan’s direction, still
talking. How would Jasnah react, now that her ward had finally caught up
to her? Would she be angry because of Shallan’s tardiness? Shallan
couldn’t be blamed for that, but people often expect irrational things from
their inferiors.
Like the grand cavern outside, this hallway was cut from the rock, but
it was more richly furbished, with ornate hanging chandeliers made with
Stormlit gemstones. Most were deep violet garnets, which were among the
less valuable stones. Even so, the sheer number hanging there glistening
with violet light would make the chandelier worth a small fortune. More
than that, however, Shallan was impressed with the symmetry of the
design and the beauty of the pattern of crystals hanging at the sides of the
chandelier.
As Jasnah grew near, Shallan could hear some of what she was saying.
“…realize that this action might prompt an unfavorable reaction from
the devotaries?” the woman said, speaking in Alethi. It was very near to
Shallan’s native Veden, and she’d been taught to speak it well during her
childhood.
“Yes, Brightness,” said the robed man. He was elderly, with a wispy
white beard, and had pale grey eyes. His open, kindly face seemed very
concerned, and he wore a squat, cylindrical hat that matched the orange
and white of his robes. Rich robes. Was this some kind of royal steward,
perhaps?
No. Those gemstones on his fingers, the way he carried himself, the
way other lighteyed attendants deferred to him…Stormfather! Shallan
thought. This has to be the king himself! Not Jasnah’s brother, Elhokar, but
the king of Kharbranth. Taravangian.
Shallan hastily performed an appropriate curtsy, which Jasnah noted.
“The ardents have much sway here, Your Majesty,” Jasnah said with a
smooth voice.
“As do I,” the king said. “You needn’t worry about me.”
“Very well,” Jasnah said. “Your terms are agreeable. Lead me to the
location, and I shall see what can be done. If you will excuse me as we
walk, however, I have someone to attend to.” Jasnah made a curt motion
toward Shallan, waving her to join them.
“Of course, Brightness,” the king said. He seemed to defer to Jasnah.
Kharbranth was a very small kingdom—just a single city—while Alethkar
was one of the world’s most powerful. An Alethi princess might well
outrank a Kharbranthian king in real terms, however protocol would have
it.
Shallan hurried to catch up to Jasnah, who walked a little behind the
king as he began to speak to his attendants. “Brightness,” Shallan said. “I
am Shallan Davar, whom you asked to meet you. I deeply regret not being
able to get to you in Dumadari.”
“The fault was not yours,” Jasnah said with a wave of the fingers. “I
didn’t expect that you would make it in time. I wasn’t certain where I
would be going after Dumadari when I sent you that note, however.”
Jasnah wasn’t angry; that was a good sign. Shallan felt some of her
anxiety recede.
“I am impressed by your tenacity, child,” Jasnah continued. “I
honestly didn’t expect you to follow me this far. After Kharbranth, I was
going to forgo leaving you notes, as I’d presumed that you’d have given
up. Most do so after the first few stops.”
Most? Then it was a test of some sort? And Shallan had passed?
“Yes indeed,” Jasnah continued, voice musing. “Perhaps I will actually
allow you to petition me for a place as my ward.”
Shallan almost stumbled in shock. Petition her? Wasn’t that what she’d
already done? “Brightness,” Shallan said, “I thought that…Well, your
letter…”
Jasnah eyed her. “I gave you leave to meet me, Miss Davar. I did not
promise to take you on. The training and care of a ward is a distraction for
which I have little tolerance or time at the present. But you have traveled
far. I will entertain your request, though understand that my requirements
are strict.”
Shallan covered a grimace.
“No tantrum,” Jasnah noted. “That is a good sign.”
“Tantrum, Brightness? From a lighteyed woman?”
“You’d be surprised,” Jasnah said dryly. “But attitude alone will not
earn your place. Tell me, how extensive is your education?”
“Extensive in some areas,” Shallan said. Then she hesitantly added,
“Extensively lacking in others.”
“Very well,” Jasnah said. Ahead, the king seemed to be in a hurry, but
he was old enough that even an urgent walk was still slow. “Then we shall
do an evaluation. Answer truthfully and do not exaggerate, as I will soon
discover your lies. Feign no false modesty, either. I haven’t the patience
for a simperer.”
“Yes, Brightness.”
“We shall begin with music. How would you judge your skill?”
“I have a good ear, Brightness,” Shallan said honestly. “I’m best with
voice, though I have been trained on the zither and the pipes. I would be
far from the best you’d heard, but I’d also be far from the worst. I know
most historical ballads by heart.”
“Give me the refrain from ‘Lilting Adrene.’”
“Here?”
“I’m not fond of repeating myself, child.”
Shallan blushed, but began to sing. It wasn’t her finest performance,
but her tone was pure and she didn’t stumble over any of the words.
“Good,” Jasnah said as Shallan paused for a breath. “Languages?”
Shallan fumbled for a moment, bringing her attention away from
frantically trying to remember the next verse. Languages? “I can speak
your native Alethi, obviously,” Shallan said. “I have a passable reading
knowledge of Thaylen and good spoken Azish. I can make myself
understood in Selay, but not read it.”
Jasnah made no comment either way. Shallan began to grow nervous.
“Writing?” Jasnah asked.
“I know all of the major, minor, and topical glyphs and can paint them
calligraphically.”
“So can most children.”
“The glyphwards that I paint are regarded by those who know me as
quite impressive.”
“Glyphwards?” Jasnah said. “I had reason to believe you wanted to be
a scholar, not a purveyor of superstitious nonsense.”
“I have kept a journal since I was a child,” Shallan continued, “in
order to practice my writing skills.”
“Congratulations,” Jasnah said. “Should I need someone to write a
treatise on their stuffed pony or give an account of an interesting pebble
they discovered, I shall send for you. Is there nothing you can offer that
shows you have true skill?”
Shallan blushed. “With all due respect, Brightness, you have a letter
from me yourself, and it was persuasive enough to make you grant me this
audience.”
“A valid point,” Jasnah said, nodding. “It took you long enough to
make it. How is your training in logic and its related arts?”
“I am accomplished in basic mathematics,” Shallan said, still flustered,
“and I often helped with minor accounts for my father. I have read
through the complete works of Tormas, Nashan, Niali the Just, and—of
course—Nohadon.”
“Placini?”
Who? “No.”
“Gabrathin, Yustara, Manaline, Syasikk, Shauka-daughter-Hasweth?”
Shallan cringed and shook her head again. That last name was
obviously Shin. Did the Shin people even have logicmasters? Did Jasnah
really expect her wards to have studied such obscure texts?
“I see,” Jasnah said. “Well, what of history?”
History. Shallan shrank down even further. “I…This is one of the areas
where I’m obviously deficient, Brightness. My father was never able to
find a suitable tutor for me. I read the history books he owned….”
“Which were?”
“The entire set of Barlesha Lhan’s Topics, mostly.”
Jasnah waved her freehand dismissively. “Barely worth the time spent
scribing them. A popular survey of historical events at best.”
“I apologize, Brightness.”
“This is an embarrassing hole. History is the most important of the
literary subarts. One would think that your parents would have taken
specific care in this area, if they’d hoped to submit you to study under a
historian like myself.”
“My circumstances are unusual, Brightness.”
“Ignorance is hardly unusual, Miss Davar. The longer I live, the more I
come to realize that it is the natural state of the human mind. There are
many who will strive to defend its sanctity and then expect you to be
impressed with their efforts.”
Shallan blushed again. She’d realized she had some deficiencies, but
Jasnah had unreasonable expectations. She said nothing, continuing to
walk beside the taller woman. How long was this hallway, anyway? She
was so flustered she didn’t even look at the paintings they passed. They
turned a corner, walking deeper into the mountainside.
“Well, let us move on to science, then,” Jasnah said, tone displeased.
“What can you say of yourself there?”
“I have the reasonable foundation in the sciences you might expect of
a young woman my age,” Shallan said, more stiffly than she would have
liked.
“Which means?”
“I can speak with skill about geography, geology, physics, and
chemistry. I’ve made particular study of biology and botany, as I was able
to pursue them with a reasonable level of independence on my father’s
estates. But if you expect me to be able to solve Fabrisan’s Conundrum
with a wave of my hand, I suspect you shall be disappointed.”
“Have I not a right to make reasonable demands of my potential
students, Miss Davar?”
“Reasonable? Your demands are about as reasonable as the ones made
of the Ten Heralds on Proving Day! With all due respect, Brightness, you
seem to want potential wards to be master scholars already. I may be able
to find a pair of eighty-year-old ardents in the city who might fit your
requirements. They could interview for the position, though they may
have trouble hearing well enough to answer your questions.”
“I see,” Jasnah replied. “And do you speak with such pique to your
parents as well?”
Shallan winced. Her time spent with the sailors had loosened her
tongue far too much. Had she traveled all this way only to offend Jasnah?
She thought of her brothers, destitute, keeping up a tenuous façade back
home. Would she have to return to them in defeat, having squandered this
opportunity? “I did not speak to them this way, Brightness. Nor should I to
you. I apologize.”
“Well, at least you are humble enough to admit fault. Still, I am
disappointed. How is it that your mother considered you ready for a
wardship?”
“My mother passed away when I was just a child, Brightness.”
“And your father soon remarried. Malise Gevelmar, I believe.”
Shallan started at her knowledge. House Davar was ancient, but only
of middling power and importance. The fact that Jasnah knew the name
of Shallan’s stepmother said a lot about her. “My stepmother passed away
recently. She didn’t send me to be your ward. I took this initiative upon
myself.”
“My condolences,” Jasnah said. “Perhaps you should be with your
father, seeing to his estates and comforting him, rather than wasting my
time.”
The men walking ahead turned down another side passage. Jasnah and
Shallan followed, entering a smaller corridor with an ornate red and
yellow rug, mirrors hanging on the walls.
Shallan turned to Jasnah. “My father has no need of me.” Well, that
was true. “But I have great need of you, as this interview itself has proven.
If ignorance galls you so much, can you in good conscience pass up the
opportunity to rid me of mine?”
“I’ve done so before, Miss Davar. You are the twelfth young woman to
ask me for a wardship this year.”
Twelve? Shallan thought. In one year? And she’d assumed that women
would stay away from Jasnah because of her antagonism toward the
devotaries.
The group reached the end of the narrow hallway, turning a corner to
find—to Shallan’s surprise—a place where a large chunk of rock had fallen
from the ceiling. A dozen or so attendants stood here, some looking
anxious. What was going on?
Much of the rubble had evidently been cleared away, though the
gouge in the ceiling gaped ominously. It didn’t look out on the sky; they
had been progressing downward, and were probably far underground. A
massive stone, taller than a man, had fallen into a doorway on the left.
There was no getting past it into the room beyond. Shallan thought she
heard sounds on the other side. The king stepped up to the stone, speaking
in a comforting voice. He pulled a handkerchief out of his pocket and
wiped his aged brow.
“The dangers of living in a building cut directly into the rock,” Jasnah
said, striding forward. “When did this happen?” Apparently she hadn’t
been summoned to the city specifically for this purpose; the king was
simply taking advantage of her presence.
“During the recent highstorm, Brightness,” the king said. He shook his
head, making his drooping, thin white mustache tremble. “The palace
architects might be able to cut a way into the room, but it would take
time, and the next highstorm is scheduled to hit in just a few days. Beyond
that, breaking in might bring down more of the ceiling.”
“I thought Kharbranth was protected from the highstorms, Your
Majesty,” Shallan said, causing Jasnah to shoot her a glance.
“The city is sheltered, young woman,” the king said. “But the stone
mountain behind us is buffeted quite strongly. Sometimes it causes
avalanches on that side, and that can cause the entire mountainside to
shake.” He glanced at the ceiling. “Cave-ins are very rare, and we thought
this area was quite safe, but…”
“But it is rock,” Jasnah said, “and there is no telling if a weak vein
lurks just beyond the surface.” She inspected the monolith that had fallen
from the ceiling. “This will be difficult. I will probably lose a very valuable
focal stone.”
“I—” the king began, wiping his brow again. “If only we had a
Shardblade—”
Jasnah cut him off with a wave of the hand. “I was not seeking to
renegotiate our bargain, Your Majesty. Access to the Palanaeum is worth
the cost. You will want to send someone for wet rags. Have the majority of
the servants move down to the other end of the hallway. You may wish to
wait there yourself.”
“I will stay here,” the king said, causing his attendants to object,
including a large man wearing a black leather cuirass, probably his
bodyguard. The king silenced them by raising his wrinkled hand. “I will
not hide like a coward when my granddaughter is trapped.”
No wonder he was so anxious. Jasnah didn’t argue further, and Shallan
could see from her eyes that it was of no consequence to her if the king
risked his life. The same apparently went for Shallan, for Jasnah didn’t
order her away. Servants approached with wetted cloths and distributed
them. Jasnah refused hers. The king and his bodyguard raised theirs to
their faces, covering mouth and nose.
Shallan took hers. What was the point of it? A couple of servants
passed some wet cloths through a space between the rock and the wall to
those inside. Then all of the servants rushed away down the hallway.
Jasnah picked and prodded at the boulder. “Miss Davar,” she said,
“what method would you use to ascertain the mass of this stone?”
Shallan blinked. “Well, I suppose I’d ask His Majesty. His architects
probably calculated it.”
Jasnah cocked her head. “An elegant response. Did they do that, Your
Majesty?”
“Yes, Brightness Kholin,” the king said. “It’s roughly fifteen thousand
kavals.”
Jasnah eyed Shallan. “A point in your favor, Miss Davar. A scholar
knows not to waste time rediscovering information already known. It’s a
lesson I sometimes forget.”
Shallan felt herself swell at the words. She already had an inkling that
Jasnah did not give such praise lightly. Did this mean that the woman was
still considering her as a ward?
Jasnah held up her freehand, Soulcaster glistening against the skin.
Shallan felt her heartbeat speed up. She’d never seen Soulcasting done in
person. The ardents were very secretive in using their fabrials, and she
hadn’t even known that her father had one until they’d found it on him.
Of course, his no longer worked. That was one of the main reasons she
was here.
The gemstones set into Jasnah’s Soulcaster were enormous, some of
the largest that Shallan had ever seen, worth many spheres each. One was
smokestone, a pure glassy black gemstone. The second was a diamond.
The third was a ruby. All three were cut—a cut stone could hold more
Stormlight—into glistening, many-faceted oval shapes.
Jasnah closed her eyes, pressing her hand against the fallen boulder.
She raised her head, inhaling slowly. The stones on the back of her hand
began to glow more fiercely, the smokestone in particular growing so
bright it was difficult to look at.
Shallan held her breath. The only thing she dared do was blink,
committing the scene to memory. For a long, extended moment, nothing
happened.
And then, briefly, Shallan heard a sound. A low thrumming, like a
distant group of voices, humming together a single, pure note.
Jasnah’s hand sank into the rock.
The stone vanished.
A burst of dense black smoke exploded into the hallway. Enough to
blind Shallan; it seemed the output of a thousand fires, and smelled of
burned wood. Shallan hastily raised the wet rag to her face, dropping to
her knees. Oddly, her ears felt stopped up, as if she’d climbed down from a
great height. She had to swallow to pop them.
She shut her eyes tightly as they began to water, and she held her
breath. Her ears filled with a rushing sound.
It passed. She blinked open her eyes to find the king and his
bodyguard huddled against the wall beside to her. Smoke still pooled at
the ceiling; the hallway smelled strongly of it. Jasnah stood, eyes still
closed, oblivious of the smoke—though grime now dusted her face and
clothing. It had left marks on the walls too.
Shallan had read of this, but she was still in awe. Jasnah had
transformed the boulder into smoke, and since smoke was far less dense
than stone, the change had pushed the smoke away in an explosive
outburst.
It was true; Jasnah really did have a functioning Soulcaster. And a
powerful one too. Nine out of ten Soulcasters were capable of a few
limited transformations: creating water or grain from stone; forming
bland, single-roomed rock buildings out of air or cloth. A greater one, like
Jasnah’s, could effectuate any transformation. Literally turn any substance
into any other one. How it must grate on the ardents that such a powerful,
holy relic was in the hands of someone outside the ardentia. And a heretic
no less!
Shallan stumbled to her feet, leaving the cloth at her mouth, breathing
humid but dust-free air. She swallowed, her ears popping again as the
hall’s pressure returned to normal. A moment later, the king rushed into
the now-accessible room. A small girl—along with several nursemaids and
other palace servants—sat on the other side, coughing. The king pulled
the girl into his arms. She was too young to have a modesty sleeve.
Jasnah opened her eyes, blinking, as if momentarily confused by her
location. She took a deep breath, and didn’t cough. Indeed, she actually
smiled, as if enjoying the scent of the smoke.
Jasnah turned to Shallan, focusing on her. “You are still waiting for a
response. I’m afraid you will not like what I say.”
“But you haven’t finished your testing of me yet,” Shallan said, forcing
herself to be bold. “Surely you won’t give judgment until you have.”
“I haven’t finished?” Jasnah asked, frowning.
“You didn’t ask me about all of the feminine arts. You left out painting
and drawing.”
“I have never had much use for them.”
“But they are of the arts,” Shallan said, feeling desperate. This was
where she was most accomplished! “Many consider the visual arts the
most refined of them all. I brought my portfolio. I would show you what I
can do.”
Jasnah pursed her lips. “The visual arts are frivolity. I have weighed
the facts, child, and I cannot accept you. I’m sorry.”
Shallan’s heart sank.
“Your Majesty,” Jasnah said to the king, “I would like to go to the
Palanaeum.”
“Now?” the king said, cradling his granddaughter. “But we are going
to have a feast—”
“I appreciate the offer,” Jasnah said, “but I find myself with an
abundance of everything but time.”
“Of course,” the king said. “I will take you personally. Thank you for
what you’ve done. When I heard that you had requested entrance…” He
continued to babble at Jasnah, who followed him wordlessly down the
hallway, leaving Shallan behind.
She clutched her satchel to her chest, lowering the cloth from her
mouth. Six months of chasing, for this. She gripped the rag in frustration,
squeezing sooty water between her fingers. She wanted to cry. That was
what she probably would have done if she’d been that same child she had
been six months ago.
But things had changed. She had changed. If she failed, House Davar
would fall. Shallan felt her determination redouble, though she wasn’t
able to stop a few tears of frustration from squeezing out of the corners of
her eyes. She was not going to give up until Jasnah was forced to truss her
up in chains and have the authorities drag her away.
Her step surprisingly firm, she walked in the direction Jasnah had
gone. Six months ago, she had explained a desperate plan to her brothers.
She would apprentice herself to Jasnah Kholin, scholar, heretic. Not for
the education. Not for the prestige. But in order to learn where she kept
her Soulcaster.
And then Shallan would steal it.
Charcoal rubbing of a map of Sadeas’s warcamp as used by a commom
spearman. It was scrarched on the back of a palm-sized cremling shell.
Rubbing labeled in ink by an anonymous Alethi scholar, circa 1173.