“These Whitecloaks are a tight-lipped group, my Lady,” Lacile
said with a smug smile, “but they’re still men. Men who
haven’t seen a woman in a while, I think. That always makes
them lose what few brains they have.”
Faile walked the horselines, the sky dark, lantern held before
her. Perrin was asleep; he’d retired early these last few days,
seeking the wolf dream. The Whitecloaks had reluctantly agreed
to delay the trial, but Perrin still should have been preparing
his words to speak there. He grumbled that he already knew
what he was going to say. Knowing him, he’d just tell Morgase
what had happened, straightforward as usual.
Lacile and Selande walked on either side of Faile. Other
members of Cha Faile walked behind, keeping careful watch
for anyone close enough to be within earshot.
“I think the Whitecloaks knew we were there to spy,” Selande
said. The short, pale woman walked with hand on her sword.
The stance didn’t seem as awkward as it once had; Selande
had taken her sword training seriously.
“No, I doubt they guessed,” Lacile replied. She still wore a
simple tan blouse and darker brown skirt. Selande had
changed back to breeches and sword immediately upon
returning—she still bore a cut on her arm from where that
sword had tried to kill her—but Lacile seemed to be savoring
her time in the skirt.
“They barely said anything of use,” Selande said.
“Yes,” Lacile replied, “but I think they’re merely in that habit.
Our excuse of checking on Maighdin and the others was a
reasonable one, my Lady. We were able to deliver your note,
then do a little chatting with the men. I teased out enough to
be of some use.”
Faile raised an eyebrow, though Lacile fell quiet as they
passed a groom working late, brushing down one of the
horses.
“The Whitecloaks respect Galad,” Lacile said once out of the
groom’s earshot. “Though some grumble about the things he’s
been telling them.”
“What things?” Faile asked.
“He wants them to ally with the Aes Sedai for the Last
Battle,” Lacile explained.
“Anyone could have told you they would dislike that idea,”
Selande said. “They’re Whitecloaks!”
“Yes,” Faile said, “but it means that this Galad is more
reasonable than his men. A useful tip, Lacile.”
The young woman swelled, brushing her short hair back in a
modest gesture, throwing back the red ribbons she had tied
there. She’d taken to wearing twice as many now, since her
Shaido captivity.
Up ahead, a lanky figure stepped between two of the horses.
He had a thick mustache, Taraboner style, and though he was
young, he had the air of one who had seen much in his life.
Dannil Lewin, the man in charge of the Two Rivers men now
that Tam had mysteriously decided to depart. Light send that
Tam was safe, wherever he’d gone.
“Why, Dannil,” Faile said, “what an odd coincidence to see
you here.”
“Coincidence?” he asked, scratching at his head. He held his
bow in one hand, staff-like, though he kept glancing at it,
wary. A lot of people did that with their weapons now. “You
asked me to come here.”
“It must be a coincidence nonetheless,” Faile said, “in case
anyone asks. Particularly if that somebody is my husband.”
“I don’t like keeping things from Lord Perrin,” Dannil said,
falling into step with her.
“And you’d prefer to risk letting him be beheaded by a
group of rabid Whitecloaks?”
“No. None of the men do.”
“You’ve done what I asked, then?”
Dannil nodded. “I spoke to Grady and Neald. Lord Perrin
has already ordered them to stay nearby, but we talked. Grady
said he’d have weaves of Air ready, and will grab Lord Perrin
and get out if things get ugly, Neald covering the retreat. I’ve
talked to the men from the Two Rivers. A group of archers in
the trees will be ready to provide a distraction.”
Faile nodded. Neither Asha’man had been wounded in this
bubble of evil, fortunately. Each had been carrying a knife, but
reports said they’d looked at the floating weapons, then
nonchalantly waved hands and blasted them from the air.
When messengers with news of Faile’s earth-throwing trick had
reached the section of camp the Asha’man had been in, they’d
found this area in much less chaos, Grady and Neald striding
through camp and felling weapons wherever they saw them.
Part of the reason for the delay before the trial was to take
care of Healing. But another large reason was because Perrin
wanted to give time to the camp’s smiths and craftsmen to
make replacement weapons for those who had lost theirs, just
in case the trial turned to a battle. And Faile was increasingly
certain that it would.
“Lord Perrin won’t like being pulled away from fighting,”
Dannil said. “Not one bit.”
“That tent could turn into a death trap,” Faile said. “Perrin
can lead the battle if he wants, but from a safer position. You
will get him out.”
Dannil sighed, but nodded. “Yes, my Lady.”
Perrin was learning not to fear Young Bull.
Step by step, he learned balance. The wolf when the wolf
was needed; the man when the man was needed. He let
himself be drawn into the hunt, but kept Faile—his home—in
his mind. He walked the edge of the sword, but each step
made him more confident.
Today, he hunted Hopper, wily and experienced prey. But
Young Bull was quick to learn, and having the mind of a man
gave him advantages. He could think like something, or
someone, that he was not.
Was this how Noam had begun? Where would this path of
understanding lead? There was a secret to this, a secret Young
Bull had to find for himself.
He could not fail. He had to learn. It seemed
that—somehow—the more confident he became in the wolf
dream, the more comfortable he became with himself in the
waking world.
Young Bull charged through an unfamiliar forest. No, a
jungle, with hanging vines and wide-fronded ferns. The
underbrush was so thick that a rat would have trouble
squeezing through. But Young Bull demanded that the world
open before him. Vines pulled back. Shrubs bent. Ferns
retracted, like mothers pulling their children out of the way of
a galloping horse.
He caught glimpses of Hopper bounding ahead. His prey
vanished. Young Bull didn’t break pace, charging through that
spot and catching the scent of Hopper’s destination. Young Bull
shifted onto an open plain with no trees and an unfamiliar
scrub patching the ground. His prey was a series of streaking
blurs in the distance. Young Bull followed, each bound carrying
him hundreds of paces.
Within seconds, they approached an enormous plateau. His
prey ran directly up the side of the stone shelf. Young Bull
followed, ignoring what was “right.” He ran with the ground far
below at his back, nose toward that boiling sea of black clouds.
He leaped over clefts in the rock, ricocheting between two sides
of a rift, cresting the top of the plateau.
Hopper attacked. Young Bull was ready. He rolled, coming up
on all fours as his prey leaped over his head, passed over the
cliff’s edge, but then vanished in a flash and was back standing
on the lip of the cliff.
Young Bull became Perrin holding a hammer made of soft
wood. Such things were possible in the wolf dream; if the
hammer hit, it would not harm.
Perrin swung, the air cracking with the sudden speed of his
motion. But Hopper was equally fast, dodging out of the way.
He rolled, then leaped at Perrin’s back, fangs glistening. Perrin
growled and shifted so that he was standing a few feet from
where he had been. Hopper’s jaws snapped open air, and
Perrin swung his hammer again.
Hopper was suddenly shrouded in a deep mist. Perrin’s
hammer slammed down through it, hitting the ground. It
bounced off. He cursed, spinning. In the fog, he couldn’t see,
couldn’t catch Hopper’s scent.
A shadow moved in the mist and Perrin lunged, but it was
only a pattern in the air. He spun and found shadows moving
all around him. The shapes of wolves, men, and other
creatures he couldn’t see.
Make the world yours, Young Bull, Hopper sent.
Perrin focused, thinking of dry air. Of the musty scent of
dust. That was what the air should be like, in an arid
landscape like this.
No. It wasn’t what the air should be like. It was how the air
was
! His mind, his will, his feelings slammed against something
else. He pushed through.
The mists vanished, evaporating in the heat. Hopper sat on
his haunches a short distance away. Good, the wolf sent. You
learn. He glanced sideways, looking toward the north, seeming
distracted by something. Then he was gone.
Perrin caught his scent and followed to the Jehannah Road.
Hopper dashed along outside the strange violet dome. They
jumped back to this place frequently to see if the dome ever
vanished. So far, it had not.
Perrin continued the chase. Was the dome meant to trap
wolves inside? But if that was the case, why had Slayer not
sprung his trap at Dragonmount, where so many wolves had
for some reason gathered?
Perhaps the dome had another purpose. Perrin memorized a
few notable rock formations along the perimeter of the dome,
then followed Hopper to a low shelf of rock. The wolf leaped
from it, vanishing in midair, and Perrin followed.
He caught the scent of Hopper’s destination in midjump, then
took himself there, still in motion. He appeared about two feet
above a shimmering blue expanse. Stunned, he fell and
splashed into the water.
He swam frantically, dropping his hammer. Hopper stood on
top of the water, bearing a wolfish expression of disapproval.
Not good, the wolf added. You still need to learn.
Perrin sputtered.
The sea grew tempestuous, but Hopper sat placidly upon the
rolling waves. Again he glanced northward, but then turned
back to Perrin. Water troubles you, Young Bull.
“I was just surprised,” Perrin said, swimming hard.
Why?
“Because I didn’t expect this!”
Why expect? Hopper sent. When you follow another, you
could end up anywhere.
“I know.” Perrin spat out a mouthful of water. He gritted his
teeth, then imagined himself standing on the water like Hopper.
Blessedly, he rose out of the sea to stand atop its surface. It
was a strange sensation, the sea undulating beneath him.
You will not defeat Slayer like this, Hopper sent.
“Then I will keep learning,” Perrin said.
There is little time.
“I will learn more quickly.”
Can you?
“We have no other choice.”
You could choose not to fight him.
Perrin shook his head. “Do we run from our prey? If we do,
they’ll hunt us instead. I will face him, and I need to be
prepared.”
There is a way. The wolf smelled of worry.
“I’ll do what I have to.”
Follow. Hopper vanished, and Perrin caught an unexpected
scent: refuse and mud, burning wood and coal. People.
Perrin shifted and found himself atop a building in Caemlyn.
He had visited this city only twice, and briefly, and seeing the
beautiful Inner City before him—ancient buildings, domes and
spires rising atop the hill like majestic pines atop a crowned
mountain—gave him pause. He was near the old wall, beyond
which spread the New City.
Hopper sat at his side, looking over the beautiful city. Much
of the city itself was said to be Ogier-built, and Perrin could
believe it, with that marvelous beauty. Tar Valon was said to be
more grand than Caemlyn. Perrin had trouble believing that
was possible.
“Why are we here?” Perrin asked.
Men dream here, Hopper replied.
In the real world, they did. Here, the place was empty. It
was light enough to be day, despite that storm overhead, and
Perrin felt there should be people crowding the streets. Women,
going to and from market. Nobles atop horses. Wagons bearing
barrels of ale and sacks of grain. Children scampering,
slipfingers searching for marks, workers replacing paving stones,
enterprising hawkers offering meat pies to them all.
Instead, there were hints. Shadows. A fallen handkerchief on
the street. Doors that were open one moment, then closed the
next. A thrown horseshoe sticking from the mud of an
alleyway. It was as if all of the people had been whisked away,
snatched by Fades or some monster from a gleeman’s dark
tale.
A woman appeared momentarily below. She wore a beautiful
green and gold dress. She stared at the street, eyes glazed
over, then was gone. People did occasionally appear in the wolf
dream. Perrin figured it must happen to them when they were
asleep, part of their natural dreams.
This place, Hopper said, is not only a place of wolves. It
is a place of all.
“Of all?” Perrin asked, sitting down on the rooftiles.
All souls know this place, Hopper said. They come here
when they reach for it.
“When they’re dreaming.”
Yes, Hopper said, lying down beside him. The fear-dreams of
men are strong. So very strong. Sometimes, those terrible
dreams come here. That sending was an enormous wolf, the
size of a building, knocking aside much smaller wolves who
tried to snap at him. There was a scent of terror and death
about the wolf. Like…a nightmare.
Perrin nodded slowly.
Many wolves have been caught in the pains of these
fear-dreams. They appear more commonly where men might
walk, though the dream lives without those who created it.
Hopper looked at Perrin. Hunting in the fear-dreams will
teach you strength. But you might die. It is very dangerous.
“I don’t have time to be safe anymore,” Perrin said. “Let’s do
it.”
Hopper didn’t ask if he was certain. He jumped down to the
street, and Perrin followed, landing softly. Hopper began to lope
forward, so Perrin broke into a jog.
“How do we find them?” Perrin asked.
Smell fear, Hopper sent. Terror.
Perrin closed his eyes, breathing in deeply. Just as doors
flashed open and closed, in the wolf dream he could sometimes
smell things there for a moment, then gone. Musty winter
potatoes. The dung of a passing horse. A pie, baking.
When he opened his eyes, he saw none of these things.
They weren’t really there, but they almost were. They could
have been.
There, Hopper said, vanishing. Perrin followed, appearing
beside the wolf outside of a narrow alleyway. Inside, it looked
too dark to be natural.
Go in, Hopper said. You will not last long your first time.
I will come for you. Remember it is not. Remember it is
false.
Feeling worried, but determined, Perrin stepped into the
alleyway. The walls to either side were black, as if they’d been
painted. Only…these walls were too dark to be painted. Was
that a tuft of grass beneath his foot? The sky above had
stopped boiling, and he thought he could see stars peeking
down. A pale moon, far too large, appeared in the sky,
shrouded in clouds. It gave a cold glow, like ice.
He wasn’t in the city anymore. He turned about, alarmed, to
find himself in a forest. The trees had thick trunks and were
of no species he could recognize. Their branches were naked.
The bark was a faint gray, lit by the phantom light above, and
looked like bone.
He needed to get back to the city! Out of this terrible place.
He turned around.
Something flashed in the night, and he spun. “Who’s there!”
he shouted.
A woman burst from the darkness, running in a mad
scramble. She wore a loose white robe, little more than a shift,
and she had long dark hair streaming behind her. She saw
him and froze, then turned and made as if to run in a
different direction.
Perrin cut her off, snatching her hand, pulling her back. She
struggled, feet marring the loamy dark ground beneath as she
tried to pull away. She was gasping. In and out. In and out.
She smelled frantic.
“I need to know the way out!” Perrin said. “We have to
return to the city.”
She met his eyes. “He’s coming,” she hissed. Her hand
slipped from his and she ran, vanishing into the night, the
darkness enfolding her like a shroud. Perrin took a step
forward, hand outstretched.
He heard something behind him. He turned slowly to find
something enormous. A looming shadow that sucked in the
moonlight. The thing seemed to draw breath away, absorbing
his very life and will.
The thing reared up taller. It was taller than the trees, a
hulking monster with arms as thick as barrels, its face and
body lost in shadow. It opened deep red eyes, like two huge
coals flaring to life.
I need to fight it! Perrin thought, hammer appearing in his
hand. He took a step forward, then thought better of it. Light!
That thing was enormous. He couldn’t fight it, not out in the
open like this. He needed cover.
He turned and ran through the hostile woods. The thing
followed. He could hear it snapping branches, its footsteps
making the earth shake. Ahead of him, he saw the woman,
her thin white gown slowing her as it caught on a branch. She
pulled free and continued to run.
The creature loomed. It would catch him, consume him,
destroy him! He yelled for the woman, reaching out toward
her. She glanced over her shoulder at him, and tripped.
Perrin cursed. He scrambled to her side, to help her up. But
the thing was so close!
It was a fight, then. His heart was thumping as quickly as a
woodlark pecking a tree. Hands sweaty, he turned, gripping his
hammer to face the terrible thing behind. He placed himself
between it and the woman.
It reared up, growing larger, those red eyes blazing with fire.
Light! He couldn’t fight that, could he? He needed an edge of
some kind. “What is that thing?” he desperately asked of the
woman. “Why does it chase us?”
“It’s him,” she hissed. “The Dragon Reborn.”
Perrin froze. The Dragon Reborn. But…but that was Rand.
It’s a nightmare, he reminded himself. None of this is real. I
can’t let myself be caught up in it!
The ground trembled, as if moaning. He could feel the heat
of the monster’s eyes. A scrambling sound came from behind
as the woman ran, leaving him.
Perrin stood up, legs shaking, every instinct crying for him to
run. But no. He couldn’t fight it, either. He could not accept
this as real.
A wolf howled, then leaped into the clearing. Hopper seemed
to push back the darkness. The creature bent down toward
Perrin, reaching a massive hand as if to crush him.
This was an alley.
Inside of Caemlyn.
It wasn’t real.
It was not.
The darkness around them faded. The enormous dark
shadow creature warped in the air, like a piece of cloth being
stretched. The moon vanished. A small pocket of ground—the
dirty, trampled earth of an alley—appeared at their feet.
Then, with a snap, the dream was gone. Perrin stood in the
alley again, Hopper at his side, no sign of the forest or the
terrible creature that someone had viewed as the Dragon
Reborn.
Perrin exhaled slowly. Sweat dripped from his brow. He
reached up to wipe it away, then willed the sweat away
instead.
Hopper vanished, and Perrin followed, finding himself on the
same rooftop as before. He sat down. Merely thinking of that
shadow made him shiver. “It felt so real,” he said. “A piece of
me knew it was a nightmare. I couldn’t help but try to fight,
or try to run. When I did either, it grew stronger, didn’t it?
Because I accepted it was real?”
Yes. You must not believe what you see.
Perrin nodded. “There was a woman in there. Part of the
dream? She wasn’t real either?”
Yes.
“Maybe she was the one who dreamed it,” Perrin said. “The
one having the original nightmare, caught up in it and trapped
here in the World of Dreams.”
Men who dream do not stay here long, Hopper sent. To
him, that was the end of the discussion. You were strong,
Young Bull. You did well. He smelled proud.
“It helped when she called the thing the Dragon Reborn.
That showed it wasn’t real. Helped me believe it wasn’t.”
You did well, foolish cub, Hopper repeated. Perhaps you
can learn.
“Only if I keep practicing. We need to do that again. Can
you find another?”
Yes, Hopper sent. There are always nightmares when your
kind is near. Always. The wolf turned northward again,
however. Perrin had thought that the thing that had been
distracting him earlier was the dreams, but it didn’t seem to
have been the case.
“What is up there?” Perrin asked. “What is it you keep
looking toward?”
It comes, Hopper sent.
“What?”
The Last Hunt. It begins. Or it does not.
Perrin frowned, standing. “You mean…right now?”
The decision will be made. Soon.
“What decision?” Hopper’s sendings were confusing, and he
couldn’t decipher them. Light and darkness, a void and fire, a
coldness and a terrible, terrible heat. Mixed with wolves
howling, calling, lending strength.
Come. Hopper stood, looking to the northeast.
Hopper vanished. Perrin shifted after him, appearing low
down on the slopes of the Dragonmount, beside an
outcropping of stone.
“Light,” Perrin said softly, looking up in awe. The storm that
had been brewing for months had come to a head. A massive
black thunderhead dominated the sky, covering the top of the
mountain. It spun slowly in the air, an enormous vortex of
blackness, emitting bolts of lightning that connected to the
clouds above. In other parts of the wolf dream the clouds were
tempestuous, yet distant. This felt immediate.
This was…the focus of something. Perrin could feel it. Often,
the wolf dream reflected things in the real world in strange or
unexpected ways.
Hopper stood on the outcropping. Perrin could feel wolves all
across the slopes of Dragonmount. In even greater numbers
than he’d felt here recently.
They wait, Hopper said. The Last Hunt comes.
As Perrin reached out, he found that other packs were
coming, still distant but moving toward Dragonmount. Perrin
looked upward at the monstrous peak. The tomb of the
Dragon, Lews Therin. It was a monument to his madness, to
both his failure and his success. His pride and his self-sacrifice.
“The wolves,” Perrin said. “They gather for the Last Hunt?”
Yes. If it occurs.
Perrin turned back to Hopper. “You said that it would. ‘The
Last Hunt comes,’ you said.”
A choice must be made, Young Bull. One path leads to the
Last Hunt.
“And the other?” Perrin asked.
Hopper didn’t respond immediately. He turned toward
Dragonmount. The other path does not lead to the Last
Hunt.
“Yes, but what does it lead to?”
To nothing.
Perrin opened his mouth to press further, but then the
weight of Hopper’s sending hit him. “Nothing” to the wolf
meant a vacant den, all of the pups taken by trappers. A night
sky empty of stars. The moon fading. The smell of old blood,
dry, stale and flaked away.
Perrin closed his mouth. The sky continued to churn with
that black storm. He smelled it on the wind, the smell of
broken trees and dirt, of flooded fields and lightning fires. As
so often, particularly recently, those scents seemed to contrast
with the world around him. One of his senses told him he was
in the very center of a catastrophe while the others saw
nothing amiss.
“This choice. Why don’t we just make it?”
It is not our choice, Young Bull.
Perrin felt drawn to the clouds above. Despite himself, he
began to walk up the slope. Hopper loped up beside him. It is
dangerous above, Young Bull.
“I know,” Perrin said. But he couldn’t stop. Instead, he
increased his speed, each step launching him just a little
farther. Hopper ran beside him, passing trees, rocks, groups of
watching wolves. Upward Perrin and Hopper went, climbing
until the trees dwindled and the ground grew cold with frost
and ice.
Eventually, they approached the cloud itself. It seemed a dark
fog, shaking with currents as it spun. Perrin hesitated at the
perimeter, then stepped inside. It was like stepping into the
nightmare. The wind was suddenly violent, the air buzzing with
energy. Leaves and dirt and grit blew in the tempest, and he
had to raise a hand against it.
No, he thought.
A small bubble of calm air opened around him. The tempest
continued to blow just inches from his face, and he had to
strain to keep from being claimed by it again. This storm
wasn’t a nightmare or a dream; it was something more vast,
something more real. This time, Perrin was the one creating
something abnormal with the bubble of safety.
He pressed forward, soon leaving tracks in snow. Hopper
strode against the wind, lessening its effect on him as well. He
was stronger at it than Perrin was—Perrin barely managed to
keep his own bubble up. He feared that without it, he would
be sucked into the storm and tossed into the air. He saw
large branches rip past in the air, and even some smaller
trees.
Hopper slowed, then sat down in the snow. He looked
upward, toward the peak. I cannot stay, the wolf sent. This is
not my place.
“I understand,” Perrin said.
The wolf vanished, but Perrin continued. He couldn’t explain
what drew him, but he knew that he needed to witness.
Someone did. He walked for what seemed like hours, focused
completely on only two things: keeping the winds off him and
putting one foot in front of the other.
The storm grew increasingly violent. It was so bad here that
he couldn’t keep all of the storm off, just the worst of it. He
passed the ridged lip where the mountaintop was broken,
picking his way alongside it, hunkered against the gusts, a
steep fall on either side. Wind began to whip at his clothing,
and he had to squint his eyes against the dust and snow in
the air.
But he continued on. Striving for the peak, which rose ahead,
rising above the blasted out side of the mountain. He knew
that atop that point, he would find what he searched for. This
horrible maelstrom was the wolf dream’s reaction to something
great, something terrible. In this place, sometimes things were
more real than in the waking world. The dream reflected a
tempest because something very important was happening. He
worried that it was something terrible.
Perrin pressed forward, shoving his way through the snows,
crawling up rock faces, his fingers leaving skin sticking to the
frigid stones. But he had trained well these last few weeks. He
leapt chasms he shouldn’t have been able to leap and climbed
rocks that should have been too high for him.
A figure stood at the very top of the jagged, broken tip of
the mountain. Perrin kept pressing onward. Someone needed to
watch. Someone needed to be there when it happened.
Finally, Perrin heaved atop one last stone and found himself
within a dozen feet of the top. He could make out the figure
now. The man stood at the very heart of the vortex of winds,
staring eastward, motionless. He was faint and translucent, a
reflection of the real world. Like a shadow. Perrin had never
seen anything like it.
It was Rand, of course. Perrin had known that it would be.
Perrin held to the stone with one ragged hand and pulled his
cloak close with the other—he’d created the cloak several cliff
faces ago. He blinked through reddened eyes, gazing upward.
He had to focus most of his concentration on pushing back
some of the winds to keep himself from being flung out into
the tempest.
Lightning flashed suddenly, thunder sounding for the first time
since he’d begun climbing. That lightning began to arc in a
dome around the top of the mountain. It threw light across
Rand’s face. That hard, impassive face, like stone itself. Where
had its curves gone? When had Rand gained so many lines
and angles? And those eyes, they seemed made of marble!
Rand wore a coat of black and red. Fine and ornamented,
with a sword at his waist. The winds didn’t affect Rand’s
clothes. Those fell unnaturally still, as if he really were just a
statue. Carved from stone. The only thing that moved was his
dark red hair, blowing in the wind, thrown and spun.
Perrin clung to the rocks for his life, cold wind biting into his
cheeks, his fingers and feet so numb he could barely feel
them. His beard bristled with dusty ice and snow. Something
black began to spin around Rand. It wasn’t part of the storm;
it seemed like night itself leaking from him. Tendrils of it grew
from Rand’s own skin, like tiny hands curling back and
wrapping around him. It seemed evil itself given life.
“Rand!” Perrin bellowed. “Fight it! Rand!”
His voice was lost in the wind, and he doubted that Rand
could have heard him anyway. The darkness continued to seep
out, like a liquid tar coming through Rand’s pores, creating a
miasma of pitch around the Dragon Reborn. Within moments,
Perrin could barely see Rand through the blackness. It enclosed
him, cutting him off, banishing him. The Dragon Reborn was
gone. Only evil remained.
“Rand, please…” Perrin whispered.
And then—from the midst of the blackness, from the center
of the uproar and the tempest—a tiny sliver of light split
through the evil. Like a candle’s glow on a very dark night.
The light shone upward, toward the distant sky, like a beacon.
So frail.
The tempest buffeted it. The winds stormed, howled, and
screamed. The lightning beat against the top of the rocky peak,
blasting free chunks of rock, scoring the ground. The blackness
undulated and pulsed.
But still the light shone.
A web of cracks appeared down the side of the shell of evil
blackness, light shining from within. Another fracture joined it,
and another. Something strong was inside, something glowing,
something brilliant.
The shell exploded outward, vaporizing and releasing a
column of light so bright, so incredible that it seemed to sear
the eyes from Perrin’s head. But he looked on anyway, not
raising arm to shade or block the resplendent image before
him. Rand stood within that light, mouth open as if bellowing
toward the skies above. The sun-yellowed column shot into the
air, and the storm seemed to shudder
, the entire sky itself
undulating.
The tempest vanished.
That column of fiery light became a column of sunlight
streaming down, illuminating the peak of Dragonmount. Perrin
pulled his fingers free from the rock, gazing on with wonder at
Rand standing within the light. It seemed so long, so very long,
since Perrin had seen a ray of pure sunlight.
The wolves began to howl. It was a howl of triumph, of glory
and of victory. Perrin raised his head and howled as well,
becoming Young Bull for a moment. He could feel the pool of
sunlight growing, and it washed over him, its warmth banishing
the frozen chill. He barely noticed when Rand’s image vanished,
for he left that sunlight behind.
Wolves appeared around Perrin, flashing into existence
midleap. They continued to bay, jumping at one another,
exulting and dancing in the sunlight as it washed over them.
They yipped and barked, tossing up patches of snow as they
bounded. Hopper was among them, and he leaped into the air,
soaring over to Perrin.
The Last Hunt begins, Young Bull! Hopper screamed. We
live. We live!
Perrin turned back to the place where Rand had stood. If
that darkness had taken Rand…
But it hadn’t. He smiled broadly. “The Last Hunt has come!”
he screamed to the wolves. “Let it begin!”
They howled their agreement, as loud as the storm had been
just moments before.