“You understand what you are to do?” Egwene asked, walking
toward her rooms in the White Tower.
Siuan nodded.
“If they do appear,” Egwene said, “you will not let yourself
be drawn into a fight.”
“We’re not children, Mother,” Siuan said dryly.
“No, you’re Aes Sedai—nearly as bad at following directions.”
Siuan gave her a flat look, and Egwene regretted her words.
They had been uncalled-for; she was on edge. She calmed
herself.
She had tried several forms of bait to lure Mesaana out, but
so far, there hadn’t been any nibbles. Egwene swore she could
almost feel the woman watching her in Tel’aran’rhiod. Yukiri
and her group were at a standstill.
Her best hope was the meeting tonight. It had to draw her.
Egwene didn’t have any time left—the monarchs she’d
persuaded were already beginning to move, and Rand’s forces
were gathering.
Tonight. It must happen tonight.
“Go,” Egwene said. “Speak with the others. I don’t want there
to be any foolish mistakes.”
“Yes, Mother,” Siuan grumbled, turning away.
“And Siuan,” Egwene called after her.
The former Amyrlin hesitated.
“See to your safety tonight,” Egwene said. “I would not lose
you.”
Siuan often gave such concern a crusty reply, but tonight she
smiled. Egwene shook her head and hurried on to her rooms,
where she found Silviana waiting.
“Gawyn?” Egwene asked.
“There has been no news of him,” Silviana replied. “I sent a
messenger for him this afternoon, but the messenger hasn’t
returned. I suspect that Gawyn is delaying his reply to be
difficult.”
“He’s nothing if not stubborn,” Egwene said. She felt exposed
without him. That was surprising, since she’d pointedly ordered
him to stay away from her door. Now she worried about him
not being there?
“Double my guard, and make certain to have soldiers posted
nearby. If my wards go off, they will raise a clatter.”
“Yes, Mother,” Silviana said.
“And send Gawyn another messenger,” she said. “One with a
more politely worded letter. Ask him to return; don’t order
him.” Knowing Silviana’s opinion of Gawyn, Egwene was sure
the original letter had been brusque.
With that, Egwene took a deep breath, then went into her
rooms, checked on her wards, and prepared to go to sleep.
I shouldn’t feel so exhausted, Perrin thought as he climbed
down from Stepper. I didn’t do anything but talk.
The trial weighed on him. It seemed to weigh upon the entire
army. Perrin looked at them as they rode back into camp.
Morgase was there, off on her own. Faile had watched her the
whole way back, smelling of anger, but not speaking a word.
Alliandre and Berelain had kept their distance.
Morgase had condemned him, but in truth, he didn’t much
care. He had deflected the Whitecloaks; now he needed to lead
his people to safety. Morgase rode through camp, seeking out
Lini and Master Gill. They’d arrived safely, together with all the
other captives, as Galad Damodred had promised. Surprisingly,
he’d sent the supplies and carts with them.
The trial was a victory, then. Perrin’s men didn’t seem to see
it that way. The soldiers split into groups as they slunk back
into camp. There was little talking.
Beside Perrin, Gaul shook his head. “Two silver points.”
“What’s that?” Perrin asked, handing Stepper to a groom.
“A saying,” Gaul said, glancing up at the sky. “Two silver
points. Twice we have run to battle and found no foe. Once
more, and we lose honor.”
“Better to find no foe, Gaul,” Perrin said. “Better no blood be
shed.”
Gaul laughed. “I do not say I wish to end the dream, Perrin
Aybara. But look at your men. They can feel what I say. You
should not dance the spears without purpose, but neither
should you too often demand that men prepare themselves to
kill, then give them nobody to fight.”
“I’ll do it as often as I like,” Perrin said gruffly, “if it means
avoiding a battle. I—”
A horse’s hooves thumped the ground, and the wind brought
him Faile’s scent as he turned to face her.
“A battle avoided indeed, Perrin Aybara,” Gaul said, “and
another invited. May you find water and shade.” He trotted
away as Faile dismounted.
Perrin took a deep breath.
“All right, husband,” she said, striding up to him. “You will
explain to me just what you thought you were doing. You let
him pass judgment on you? You promised to deliver yourself
to him? I wasn’t under the impression that I’d married a fool!”
“I’m no fool, woman,” he roared back. “You keep telling me
I need to lead. Well, today I took your advice!”
“You took it and made the wrong decision.”
“There was no right decision!”
“You could have let us fight them.”
“They intend to fight at the Last Battle,” Perrin said. “Every
Whitecloak we killed would be one less man to face the Dark
One. Me, my men, the Whitecloaks—none of us matter
compared to what is coming! They had to live, and so did we.
And this was the only way!”
Light, but it felt wrong to yell at her. Yet it actually softened
her temper. Remarkably, the soldiers nearby him started to
nod, as if they hadn’t been able to see the truth until he’d
bellowed it out.
“I want you to take command of the retreat,” Perrin said to
Faile. “The trap hasn’t sprung yet, but I find myself itching
more each minute. Something’s watching us; they have taken
away our gateways, and they intend to see us dead. They now
know we won’t fight the Whitecloaks, which means they’ll
attack soon. Maybe this evening; if we’re lucky, they’ll delay
until tomorrow morning.”
“We aren’t done with this argument,” she warned.
“What’s done is done, Faile. Look forward.”
“Very well.” She still smelled angry, those beautiful dark eyes
of hers fierce, but she contained it.
“I’m going to the wolf dream,” Perrin said, glancing toward
the edge of camp, where their tent lay. “I’ll either destroy that
dome, or I’ll find a way to force Slayer to tell me how to
make Traveling work again. Get the people ready to march,
and have the Asha’man try to make a gateway on every count
of a hundred. The moment it works, get our people out of
here.”
“Where?” Faile asked. “Jehannah?”
Perrin shook his head. “Too close. The enemy might be
watching there. Andor. Take them to Caemlyn. Actually, no.
Whitebridge. Let’s stay away from anywhere they might expect.
Besides, I don’t want to show up with an army on Elayne’s
doorstep until I’ve warned her.”
“A good plan,” Faile said. “If you fear attack, we should
move the camp followers first, rather than moving the armies
through and leaving us undefended.”
Perrin nodded. “But get them moving as soon as the
gateways work again.”
“And if you don’t succeed?” Faile had begun to sound
determined. Frightened, but determined.
“If I haven’t restored gateways in one hour, start them
marching toward the perimeter where Neald discovered that he
can make gateways. I don’t think that will work; I think Slayer
will just move the dome, always keeping us underneath it. But
it’s something.”
Faile nodded, but her scent became hesitant. “That will also
put us marching, rather than in camp. Much easier to ambush
that way.”
“I know,” Perrin said. “That is why I must not fail.”
She took him into her arms, head against his chest. She
smelled so wonderful. Like Faile. That was the definition of
wonderful to him. “You’ve said he’s stronger than you are,”
she whispered.
“He is.”
“Can I do anything to help you face him?” she asked softly.
“If you watch over them while I’m gone, that will help.”
“What happens if he kills you while you’re there?”
Perrin didn’t reply.
“There’s no other way?” she asked.
He pulled back from her. “Faile, I’m fairly certain that he’s
Lord Luc. They smell different, but there’s something similar
about them, too. And when I wounded Slayer in the wolf
dream before, Luc bore the wound.”
“Is that supposed to help me feel better?” she asked,
grimacing.
“It’s all coming back around. We finish with Malden and find
ourselves within a stone’s toss of the remnants of the
Whitecloaks, Byar and Bornhald with them. Slayer appears in
the wolf dream again. That man I told you of, Noam, the one
who was in the cage. Do you remember where I found him?”
“You said you were chasing Rand. Through…”
“Ghealdan,” Perrin said. “It happened not one week’s ride
from here.”
“An odd coincidence, but—”
“No coincidences, Faile. Not with me. I’m here for a reason.
He’s here for a reason. I must face this.”
She nodded. He turned to walk toward their tent, her hand
slipping free of his. The Wise Ones had given him a tea that
would let him sleep so he could enter the wolf dream.
It was time.
“How could you let him go?” Byar said, knuckles clenched on
the pommel of his sword, white cloak flapping behind him. He,
Bornhald and Galad walked through the middle of their camp.
“I did what was right,” Galad said.
“Letting him go free was not right!” Byar said. “You can’t
believe—”
“Child Byar,” Galad said softly, “I find your attitude
increasingly insubordinate. That troubles me. It should trouble
you as well.”
Byar closed his mouth and said no more, though Galad could
see that it was difficult for him to hold his tongue. Behind
Byar, Bornhald walked silently, looking very upset.
“I believe that Aybara will keep his oath,” Galad said. “And if
he does not, I now have the legal grounds to hunt him and
exact punishment. It is not ideal, but there was wisdom to his
words. I do believe the Last Battle is coming, and if so, it is
time to unite against the Shadow.”
“My Lord Captain Commander,” Byar said, managing his
tone, “with all respect, that man is of the Shadow. He will not
be fighting beside us, but against us.”
“If that is true,” Galad said, “we will still have a chance to
face him on the field of battle. I have made my decision, Child
Byar.” Harnesh strode up to join them and saluted. Galad
nodded. “Child Harnesh, strike camp.”
“My Lord Captain Commander? This late in the day?”
“Yes,” Galad said. “We will march into the night and put
some distance between us and Aybara, just in case. Leave
scouts, make certain he doesn’t try to follow us. We’ll make for
Lugard. We can recruit and resupply, then continue on toward
Andor.”
“Yes, my Lord Captain Commander,” Harnesh said.
Galad turned to Byar as Harnesh left. The skeletal man gave
a salute, sunken eyes dangerously resentful, then stalked off.
Galad stopped on the field, between white tents, hands behind
his back as he watched messengers relay his orders through
camp.
“You are quiet, Child Bornhald,” Galad said after a few
moments. “Are you as displeased with my actions as Child
Byar is?”
“I don’t know,” Bornhald said. “I’ve believed for so long that
Aybara killed my father. And yet, seeing how Jaret acts,
remembering his description…There is no evidence. It frustrates
me to admit it, Galad, but I have no proof. He did kill Lathin
and Yamwick, however. He killed Children, so he is a
Darkfriend.”
“I killed one of the Children, too,” Galad said. “And was
named Darkfriend for it.”
“That was different.” Something seemed to be troubling
Bornhald, something he wasn’t saying.
“Well, that is true,” Galad said. “I do not disagree that Aybara
should be punished, but the day’s events leave me strangely
troubled.”
He shook his head. Finding answers should be easy. The
right thing always came to him. However, whenever he thought
he’d seized upon the right course of action regarding Aybara,
he found distasteful worries cropping up inside of him.
Life is not so easy as the toss of a coin, his mother had
said. One side or the other…your simple illusions…
He did not like the feeling. Not at all.
Perrin inhaled deeply. Flowers bloomed in the wolf dream, even
as the sky raged silver, black and gold. The scents were so
incongruous. Baking cherry pie. Horse dung. Oil and grease.
Soap. A wood fire. Arrath. Thyme. Catfern. A hundred other
herbs he couldn’t name.
Very few of them fit the meadow where he had appeared.
He’d made certain not to appear where his camp was in the
wolf dream; that would have put him too near Slayer.
The scents were fleeting. Vanishing too quickly, as if they’d
never really been there.
Hopper, he sent.
I am here, Young Bull. The wolf appeared beside him.
“It smells strange.”
Scents blend, Hopper sent. Like the waters of a thousand
streams. It is not natural. It is not good. This place begins
to break.
Perrin nodded. He shifted, appearing knee deep in brown
cockleburrs just outside of the violet dome. Hopper appeared
to his right, weeds crackling as he moved among them.
The dome rose, ominous and unnatural. A wind blew,
shuffling the weeds and shaking tree limbs. Lightning flashed
silently in the sky.
He is there, Hopper sent. Always.
Perrin nodded. Did Slayer come to the wolf dream the way
Perrin did? And did spending time in it leave him still tired, as
it did Perrin? The man never seemed to leave this area.
He was guarding something. There had to be a way in the
wolf dream to disable the dome.
Young Bull, we come. The sending was from Oak Dancer.
Her pack was approaching, now only three strong. Sparks,
Boundless, Oak Dancer herself. They had chosen to come here,
rather than join the wolves running northward.
The three appeared behind Hopper. Perrin looked to them,
and sent concern. This will be dangerous. Wolves may die.
Their sending back was insistent. Slayer must fall for what
he has done. Together we are strong. Young Bull should not
hunt such dangerous prey alone.
He nodded in agreement, letting his hammer appear in his
hand. Together, they approached the dome. Perrin walked into
it with a slow, determined stride. He refused to feel weakness.
He was strong. The dome was nothing but air. He believed
the world to be as he wished it.
He stumbled, but pulled through into the inside of the dome.
The landscape felt faintly darker here. Elder trees more dim of
bark, the dying dogfennel a deeper green or brown. Hopper
and the pack moved through the dome around him.
We make for the center, Perrin sent. If there is a secret to
discover, it will probably be there.
They moved slowly through the brush and stands of trees.
Perrin imposed his will upon the area around him, and the
leaves stopped crackling, weeds remaining silent when he
brushed against them. That was natural. It was the way things
should be. So it was.
It would be a long distance to the center, so Perrin began
hopping forward. Not jumps or steps; he simply stopped being
in one place, appearing in a different location. He masked his
scent, though Slayer was not a wolf.
That has to become my advantage, Perrin thought as they
grew closer and closer to the center. He is more experienced
than I. But I have the wolf within me. This place is our
dream. He is the invader. However skilled he may be, he is
not one of us.
And that is why I will win.
Perrin smelled something; an increasing wrongness in the air.
He and the wolves crept up to a large hillside, then peered
around a cleft in the land there. A small stand of elder trees
stood just ahead, perhaps fifty paces away. Looking up, he
judged this to be very near the center of the dome. Using the
shifting way of wolves, they’d traveled several hours’ worth of
walking in a few minutes.
That is it, Perrin sent. He looked at Hopper. The wolf’s
scent was masked, but he was coming to know wolves well
enough to read concern in Hopper’s stare and the way he
stood with forelegs bent just a fraction.
Something changed.
Perrin heard nothing. He smelled nothing. But he felt
something, a small tremble in the ground.
Go! he sent, vanishing. He appeared ten paces away to see
an arrow hit the hillside where he’d been standing. The shaft
split a large stone, embedding itself in the rock and earth up
to its black fletching.
Slayer stood from a crouch, turning to look at Perrin across
the short expanse of ground. His eyes seemed black, his
square face shadowed, his tall body muscular and dangerous.
As he often did, he wore a smile. Really a sneer. He wore
leather breeches and a shirt of deep green, forearms exposed,
hand holding his wicked bow of dark wood. He wore no
quiver; he created arrows as he needed them.
Perrin held his eyes, stepping forward as if in challenge. That
was enough of a distraction for the wolves to attack from
behind.
Slayer yelled, spinning as Boundless slammed into him. Perrin
was there in an eyeblink, bringing his hammer down. Slayer
vanished, and Perrin struck only earth, but he caught a whiff
of where Slayer had gone.
Here? That scent was of the same place that Perrin was.
Alarmed, he looked up to see Slayer hovering in the air just
above, drawing an arrow.
The wind, Perrin thought. It is so strong!
The arrow loosed, but a sudden gust blew it sideways. It
sank into the earth just beside Perrin. He did not flinch, raising
his hands, his own bow appearing in them. Already drawn,
arrow in place.
Slayer’s eyes opened wider as Perrin loosed. Slayer vanished,
appearing on the ground a short distance away—and Hopper
leaped on him from above, pulling him to the ground. Slayer
cursed with a guttural sound, then vanished.
Here, Hopper sent, showing a hillside.
Perrin was there in an instant, hammer in his hands, the
pack with him. Slayer raised a sword in one hand and a knife
in the other as Perrin and the four wolves attacked.
Perrin hit first, swinging his hammer with a roar. Slayer
actually sank into the ground, as if it were liquid, dropping
beneath the hammer blow. He rammed his knife
forward—piercing Oak Dancer’s breast with a splash of scarlet
blood as he swung to the side, slashing across Sparks’ face.
Oak Dancer didn’t get time to howl; she collapsed to the
ground, and Slayer vanished as Perrin brought his hammer
back around. Whimpering, Sparks sent agony and panic and
vanished. He would live. But Oak Dancer was dead.
Slayer’s scent had been this place again. Perrin turned to
smash his hammer into Slayer’s sword as it sought to pierce
him from behind. Again a look of surprise from Slayer. The
man bared his teeth, pulling back, keeping a wary eye on the
two remaining wolves, Hopper and Boundless. Slayer’s forearm
was bleeding where Hopper had bitten him.
“How is the dome created, Luc?” Perrin said. “Show me and
leave. I will let you depart.”
“Bold words, cub,” Slayer snarled back. “For one who just
watched me kill one of your pack.”
Boundless howled in anger, leaping forward. Perrin attacked at
the same time, but the ground beneath them trembled, shaking.
No, Perrin thought. His own footing became firm as
Boundless was knocked to the ground.
Slayer lunged, and Perrin raised his hammer to block—but
Slayer’s weapon turned into smoke and passed right through it,
solidifying on the other side. With a yelp, Perrin tried to pull
back, but the blade scored him across the chest, cutting
through his shirt and leaving a gash from one arm to the
other. It flared with pain.
Perrin gasped, stumbling backward. Slayer drove forward, but
something crashed into him from above. Hopper. Once again
the grizzled wolf bore Slayer to the ground, growling, fangs
flashing.
Slayer cursed and kicked the wolf free. Hopper went flying
with a whimper of pain, tossed some twenty feet. To the side,
Boundless had caused the earth to stop rumbling, but had hurt
his paw.
Perrin shook himself free of his pain. Slayer was strong in
control over this world. Perrin’s hammer felt sluggish whenever
he swung, as if the air itself were thicker.
Slayer had smiled when he’d killed Oak Dancer. Perrin moved
forward, enraged. Slayer was on his feet and retreating back
down the hillside, toward the trees. Perrin chased after him,
ignoring his wound. It wasn’t bad enough to stop him, though
he did imagine a bandage in place on it, his clothing mended
and tight against his chest to stanch the blood.
He entered the trees just behind Slayer. The branches closed
overhead, and vines whipped from the darkened shadows.
Perrin didn’t bother fighting them off. Vines didn’t move like
that. They couldn’t touch him. Sure enough, as soon as they
grew close, they withered and fell still.
Slayer cursed, then began to move in bursting steps, leaving
a blur behind him. Perrin followed, enhancing his own speed.
Perrin didn’t consciously make the decision to drop to four
legs, but in a heartbeat he had done so, chasing after Slayer
as he’d hunted the white stag.
Slayer was fast, but he was merely a man. Young Bull was
part of the land itself, the trees, the brush, the stones, the
rivers. He moved through the forest like a breeze blowing
through a hollow, keeping pace with Slayer, gaining on him.
Each log in Slayer’s way was an obstruction, but to Young Bull
each was just a part of the pathway.
Young Bull leaped to the side, paws against the tree trunks
pushing him when he turned. He soared, over stones and
rocks, leaping from one to the next, leaving a blur in the air
behind him.
Slayer smelled afraid for the first time. He vanished, but
Young Bull followed, appearing in the field where the army
camped, beneath the shadow of the large stone sword. Slayer
looked over his shoulder and cursed, vanishing again.
Young Bull followed. The place where the Whitecloaks had
made camp.
The top of a small plateau.
A cavern burrowed into a hillside.
The middle of a small lake. Young Bull ran upon the surface
with ease.
Each place Slayer went, he followed, each moment growing
closer. There was no time for swords, hammers, or bows. This
was a chase, and Young Bull was the hunter this time. He—
He leaped into the middle of a field, and Slayer wasn’t there.
He smelled where the man had gone, however. He followed
him, and appeared in another place on the same field. There
were scents of places all around. What?
Perrin came to a stop, booted feet grinding into the ground.
He spun, bewildered. Slayer must have hopped quickly through
several different places in the same field, confusing his trail.
Perrin tried to determine which one to follow, but they all
faded and intermixed.
“Burn him!” he said.
Young Bull, a sending came. Sparks. The wolf had been
wounded, but he hadn’t fled as Perrin had assumed. He sent
an image of a thin silver rod, two handspans high, sprouting
from the ground in the middle of a stand of dogfennel.
Perrin smiled and sent himself there. The wounded wolf, still
trailing blood, lay beside the object. It was obviously some sort
of ter’angreal. It appeared to be made of dozens upon
dozens of fine, wirelike bits of metal woven together like a
braid. It was about two handspans long, and was driven point
first into the soft earth.
Perrin pulled it from the ground. The dome didn’t vanish. He
turned the spike over in his hand, but had no idea how to
make the dome stop. He willed the spike to change into
something else, a stick, and was shocked when he was
rebuffed. The object actually seemed to push his mind away.
It is here in its reality, Sparks sent. The sending tried to
convey something, that the item was somehow more real than
most things in the dream world.
Perrin didn’t have time to wonder about it. First priority was
to move the dome, if he could, away from where his people
camped. He sent himself to the edge where he’d entered the
dome.
As he’d hoped, the center of the dome moved with him. He
was at the place where he’d entered, but the edge of the
dome had changed positions, the center falling wherever Perrin
was standing. The dome still dominated the sky, extending far
in every direction.
Young Bull, Sparks sent. I am free. The wrongness is gone.
Go, Perrin sent. I’ll take this and get rid of it. Each of
you, go a different direction and howl. Confuse Slayer.
The wolves responded. A part of Perrin, the hunter inside of
him, was frustrated at not having been able to defeat Slayer
directly. But this was more important.
He tried to shift to someplace distant, but it didn’t work. It
appeared that even though he was holding the ter’angreal, he
was still bound by the dome’s rules.
So, instead, he shifted as far as he could. Neald had said it
was about four leagues from their camp to the perimeter, so
Perrin shifted that far to the north, then did so again, and
again. The enormous dome moved with him, its center always
appearing directly over his head.
He would take the spike someplace safe, someplace where
Slayer couldn’t find it.