Perrin ran through the darkness. Trails of watery mist brushed
his face and condensed in his beard. His mind was foggy,
distant. Where was he going? What was he doing? Why was
he running?
He roared and charged, ripping through the veiled darkness
and bursting into open air. He took a deep breath and landed
on the top of a steep hill covered with short, patchy grass,
with a ring of trees at its base. The sky rumbled and churned
with clouds, like a boiling pot of tar.
He was in the wolf dream. His body slumbered in the real
world, on this hilltop, with Faile. He smiled, breathing deeply.
His problems had not diminished. In fact, with the Whitecloak
ultimatum, they seemed magnified. But all was well with Faile.
That simple fact changed so much. With her at his side, he
could do anything.
He leaped down from the hillside and crossed the open area
where his army camped. They had been here long enough
that signs had appeared in the wolf dream. Tents reflected the
waking world, though their flaps were in a different position
each time he looked at them. Cook-fire pits in the ground, ruts
in the pathways, occasional bits of refuse or discarded tools.
These would pop into existence, then vanish.
He moved quickly through the camp, each step taking him
ten paces. Once he might have found the lack of people in the
camp eerie, but he was accustomed to the wolf dream now.
This was natural.
Perrin approached the statue at the side of the camp, then
looked up at the age-pocked stone, overgrown with lichen of
black, orange and green. The statue must have been posed
oddly, if it had fallen in such a way. It almost looked as if it
had been created this way—an enormous arm bursting from
the loam.
Perrin turned to the southeast, toward where the Whitecloak
camp would be found. He had to deal with them. He was
increasingly certain—confident, even—that he could not continue
until he had confronted these shadows from the past.
There was one way to deal with them for certain. A careful
trap using the Asha’man and Wise Ones, and Perrin could hit
the Children so hard that they shattered. He could maybe even
destroy them permanently as a group.
He had the means, the opportunity, and the motivation. No
more fear in the land, no more Whitecloak mock trials. He
leaped forward, soaring thirty feet and falling lightly to the
ground. Then he took off, running southeast along the road.
He found the Whitecloak camp in a forested hollow,
thousands of white tents set up in tight rings. The tents of
some ten thousand Children, along with another ten thousand
mercenaries and other soldiers. Balwer estimated that this was
the bulk of the remaining Children, though he had been
unclear on how he’d gotten that knowledge. Hopefully the
dusty man’s hatred of the Whitecloaks wasn’t clouding his
judgment.
Perrin moved among the tents, looking to see if he could
discover anything that Elyas and the Aiel had not. It was
unlikely, but he figured it was worth an attempt, while he was
here. Besides, he wanted to see the place with his own eyes.
He lifted flaps, moved between groupings of tents, inspecting
the place and getting a feel for it and its occupants. The camp
was arranged in a very orderly manner. The insides were less
stable than the tents themselves, but what he saw was also
kept orderly.
The Whitecloaks liked things neat, tidy and carefully folded.
And they liked to pretend the entire world could be polished
up and cleaned the same way, people defined and explained in
one or two words.
Perrin shook his head, making his way to the Lord Captain
Commander’s tent. The organization of the tents led him to it
easily, at the center ring. It wasn’t much larger than the other
tents, and Perrin ducked inside, trying to see if he could find
anything of use. It was furnished simply, with a bedroll that
was in a different position each time Perrin looked at it, along
with a table holding objects that vanished and appeared at
random.
Perrin stepped up to it, picking up something that appeared
there. A signet ring. He didn’t recognize the signet, a winged
dagger, but memorized it just before the ring vanished from his
fingers, too transient to stay long in the wolf dream. Though
he’d met with the Whitecloak leader, and corresponded with
the man, he didn’t know much about the man’s past. Perhaps
this would help.
He searched through the tent a while longer, finding nothing
of use, then went to the large tent where Gaul had explained
that many of the captives were being kept. Here, he saw
Master Gill’s hat appear for a moment, then vanish.
Satisfied, Perrin walked back out of the tent. As he did so,
he found something bothering him. Shouldn’t he have tried
something like this when Faile was kidnapped? He’d sent
numerous scouts to Malden. Light, he’d had to restrain himself
from marching off to find Faile on his own! But he’d never
tried visiting the place in the wolf dream.
Perhaps it would have been useless. But he hadn’t considered
the possibility, and that troubled him.
He froze, passing a cart parked beside one of the Whitecloak
tents. The back was open, and a grizzled silver wolf lay there,
watching him.
“I do let my attention grow too narrow, Hopper,” Perrin said.
“When I get consumed by a goal, it can make me careless.
That can be dangerous. As in battle, when concentrating on
the adversary in front of you can expose you to the archer on
the side.”
Hopper cracked his mouth open, smiling after the way of
wolves. He hopped from the cart. Perrin could sense other
wolves nearby—the others of the pack he had run with before.
Oak Dancer, Sparks and Boundless.
“All right,” he said to Hopper. “I’m ready to learn.”
Hopper sat down on his haunches, regarding Perrin. Follow,
the wolf sent.
Then vanished.
Perrin cursed, looking about. Where had the wolf gone? He
moved through the camp, searching, but couldn’t sense Hopper
anywhere. He reached out with his mind. Nothing.
Young Bull. Suddenly Hopper was behind him. Follow. He
vanished again.
Perrin growled, then moved about the camp in a flash. When
he didn’t find the wolf, he shifted to the field of grain where
he’d met Hopper last time. The wolf wasn’t there. Perrin stood
among the blowing grain, frustrated.
Hopper found him a few minutes later. The wolf smelled
dissatisfied. Follow! he sent.
“I don’t know how,” Perrin said. “Hopper, I don’t know
where you’re going.”
The wolf sat down. He sent an image of a wolf pup, joining
others of the pack. The pup watched his elders and did what
they did.
“I’m not a wolf, Hopper,” Perrin said. “I don’t learn the way
you do. You must explain to me what you want me to do.”
Follow here. The wolf sent an image of, oddly, Emond’s
Field. Then he vanished.
Perrin followed, appearing on a familiar green. A group of
buildings lined it, which felt wrong. Emond’s Field should have
been a little village, not a town with a stone wall and a road
running past the mayor’s inn, paved with stones. Much had
changed in the short time he had been away.
“Why have we come here?” Perrin asked. Disturbingly, the
wolfhead banner still flew on the pole above the green. It could
have been a trick of the wolf dream, but he doubted it. He
knew all too well how eagerly the people of the Two Rivers
flew the standard of “Perrin Goldeneyes.”
Men are strange, Hopper sent.
Perrin turned to the old wolf.
Men think strange thoughts, Hopper said. We do not try to
understand them. Why does the stag flee, the sparrow fly,
the tree grow? They do. That is all.
“Very well,” Perrin said.
I cannot teach a sparrow to hunt, Hopper continued. And
a sparrow does not teach a wolf to fly.
“But here, you can fly,” Perrin said.
Yes. And I was not taught. I know. Hopper’s scent was full
of emotion and confusion. Wolves all remembered everything
that one of their kind knew. Hopper was frustrated because he
wanted to teach Perrin, but wasn’t accustomed to doing things
in the way of people.
“Please,” Perrin said. “Try to explain to me what you mean.
You always tell me I’m here ‘too strongly.’ It’s dangerous, you
say. Why?”
You slumber, Hopper said. The other you. You cannot stay
here too long. You must always remember that you are
unnatural here. This is not your den.
Hopper turned toward the houses around them. This is your
den, the den of your sire. This place. Remember it. It will
keep you from being lost. This was how your kind once did
it. You understand.
It wasn’t a question, though it was something of a plea.
Hopper wasn’t certain how to explain further.
“I can try,” Perrin thought, interpreting the sending as best
he could. But Hopper was wrong. This place wasn’t his home.
Perrin’s home was with Faile. He needed to remember that,
somehow, to keep himself from getting drawn into the wolf
dream too strongly.
I have seen your she in your mind, Young Bull, Hopper
sent, cocking his head. She is like a hive of bees, with sweet
honey and sharp stings. Hopper’s image of Faile was that of
a very confusing female wolf. One who would playfully nip at
his nose one moment, then growl at him the next, refusing to
share her meat.
Perrin smiled.
The memory is part, Hopper sent. But the other part is
you. You must stay as Young Bull. A wolf’s reflection in the
water, shimmering and growing indistinct as ripples crossed it.
“I don’t understand.”
The strength of this place, Hopper sent an image of a wolf
carved of stone, is the strength of you. The wolf thought for
a moment. Stand. Remain. Be you.
With that, the wolf stood and backed up, as if preparing to
run at Perrin.
Confused, Perrin imagined himself as he was, holding that
image in his head as strongly as he could.
Hopper ran and jumped at him, slamming his body into
Perrin. He’d done this before, somehow forcing Perrin out of
the wolf dream.
This time, however, Perrin was set and waiting. Instinctively,
Perrin pushed back. The wolf dream wavered around him, but
then grew firm again. Hopper rebounded off him, though the
heavy wolf should have knocked Perrin to the ground.
Hopper shook his head, as if dazed. Good, he sent, pleased.
Good. You learn. Again.
Perrin steadied himself just in time to get slammed by
Hopper a second time. Perrin growled, but held steady.
Here, Hopper sent, giving an image of the field of grain.
Hopper vanished, and Perrin followed. As soon as he
appeared, the wolf slammed into him, mind and body.
Perrin fell to the ground this time, everything wavering and
shimmering. He felt himself being pushed away, forced out of
the wolf dream and into his ordinary dreams.
No! he thought, holding to an image of himself kneeling
among those fields of grain. He was there. He imagined it,
solid and real. He smelled the oats, the humid air, alive with
the scents of dirt and fallen leaves.
The landscape coalesced. He panted, kneeling on the ground,
but he was still in the wolf dream.
Good, Hopper sent. You learn quickly.
“There’s no other option,” Perrin said, climbing to his feet.
The Last Hunt comes, Hopper agreed, sending an image of
the Whitecloak camp.
Perrin followed, bracing himself. No attack came. He looked
around for the wolf.
Something slammed into his mind. There was no motion, only
the mental attack. It wasn’t as strong as before, but it was
unexpected. Perrin barely managed to fight it off.
Hopper fell from the air, landing gracefully on the ground.
Always be ready, the wolf sent. Always, but especially when
you move. An image of a careful wolf, testing the air before
moving out into an open pasture.
“I understand.”
But do not come too strongly, Hopper chided.
Immediately, Perrin forced himself to remember Faile and the
place where he slept. His home. He…faded slightly. His skin
didn’t grow translucent, and the wolf dream stayed the same,
but he felt more exposed.
Good, Hopper sent. Always ready, but never holding on
too strong. Like carrying a pup in your jaws.
“That’s not going to be an easy balance,” Perrin said.
Hopper gave a slightly confused scent. Of course it was
difficult.
Perrin smiled. “What now?”
Running, Hopper sent. Then more practice.
The wolf dashed away, zipping in a blur of gray and silver
off toward the road. Perrin followed. He sensed determination
from Hopper—a scent that was oddly similar to the way Tam
smelled when training the refugees to fight. That made Perrin
smile.
They ran down the road, and Perrin practiced the balance of
not being in the dream too strongly, yet being ready to solidify
his sense of self at any moment. Occasionally Hopper would
attack him, trying to throw him from the wolf dream. They
continued until Hopper—suddenly—stopped running.
Perrin took a few extra steps, surging ahead of the wolf,
before stopping. There was something in front of him. A
translucent violet wall that cut directly through the roadway. It
extended up into the sky and distantly to both the right and
the left.
“Hopper?” Perrin asked. “What is this?”
Wrongness, Hopper sent. It should not be here. The wolf
smelled angry.
Perrin stepped forward and raised a hand toward the surface,
but hesitated. It looked like glass. He’d never seen anything like
this in the wolf dream. Might it be like the bubbles of evil? He
looked up at the sky.
The wall flashed suddenly and was gone. Perrin blinked,
stumbling back. He glanced at Hopper. The wolf sat on his
haunches, staring at the place where the wall had been. Come,
Young Bull, the wolf finally sent, standing. We will practice in
another place.
He loped away. Perrin looked back down the road. Whatever
the wall had been, it had left no visible sign of its existence.
Troubled, Perrin followed after Hopper.
“Burn me, where are those archers!” Rodel Ituralde climbed up
to the top of the hillside. “I wanted them formed up on the
forward towers an hour ago to relieve the crossbowmen!”
Before him, the battle clanged and screamed and grunted and
thumped and roared. A band of Trollocs had surged across
the river, crossing on ford rafts or a crude floating bridge
fashioned from log rafts. Trollocs hated crossing water. It took
a lot to get them over.
Which was why this fortification was so useful. The hillside
sloped directly down to the only ford of reasonable size in
leagues. To the north, Trollocs boiled through a pass out of the
Blight and ran right into the River Arinelle. When they could
be forced across, they faced the hillside, which had been dug
with trenches, piled with bulwarks and set with archer towers
at the top. There was no way to reach the city of Maradon
from the Blight except by passing over this hill.
It was an ideal position for holding back a much larger force,
but even the best fortifications could be overrun, particularly
when your men were tired from weeks of fighting. The Trollocs
had crossed and fought their way up the slope under a hail of
arrows, falling into the trenches, having difficulty surmounting
the high bulwarks.
The hillside had a flat area at the top, where Ituralde had his
command position, in the upper camp. He called orders as he
looked down on the woven mass of trenches, bulwarks and
towers. The Trollocs were dying to pikemen behind one of the
bulwarks. Ituralde watched until the last Trolloc—an enormous,
ram-faced beast—roared and died with three pikes in its gut.
It looked as if another surge was coming, the Myrddraal
driving another mass of Trollocs through the pass. Enough
bodies had fallen in the river that it was clogged for the
moment, running red, the carcasses providing a footing for
those running up behind.
“Archers!” Ituralde bellowed. “Where are those bloody—”
A company of archers finally ran past, some of the reserves
he’d held back. Most of them had the coppery skin of Domani,
though there were a few stray Taraboners mixed in. They
carried a wide variety of bows: narrow Domani longbows,
serpentine Saldaean shortbows scavenged from guard posts or
villages, even a few tall Two Rivers longbows.
“Lidrin,” Ituralde called. The young, hard-eyed officer hurried
across the hillside to him. Lidrin’s brown uniform was wrinkled
and dirty at the knees, not because he was undisciplined, but
because there were times when his men needed him more
than his laundry did.