Thunder rumbled above, soft and menacing like the growl of a
distant beast. Perrin turned his eyes toward the sky. A few
days ago, the pervasive cloud cover had turned black,
darkening like the advent of a horrible storm. But rain had
come only in spurts.
Another rumble shook the air. There was no lightning. Perrin
patted Stayer on the neck; the horse smelled skittish—prickly,
sweaty. The horse wasn’t the only one. That scent hung above
his enormous force of troops and refugees as they tramped
across the muddy ground. That force created a thunder of its
own, footsteps, hoofbeats, wagon wheels turning, men and
women calling.
They had nearly reached the Jehannah Road. Originally,
Perrin had planned to cross that and continue on northward,
toward Andor. But he’d lost a great deal of time to the
sickness that had struck his camp—both Asha’man had nearly
died. Then this thick mud had slowed them even further. All
told, it had been over a month since they’d left Malden, and
they’d traveled only as far as Perrin had originally hoped to go
in a week.
Perrin put his hand into his coat pocket, feeling at the small
blacksmith’s puzzle there. They’d found it in Malden, and he’d
taken to fiddling with it. So far, he hadn’t figured out how to
get the pieces apart. It was as complex a puzzle as he’d ever
seen.
There was no sign of Master Gill or the people Perrin had
sent on ahead with supplies. Grady had managed a few small
gateways ahead to send scouts to find them, but they had
returned without news. Perrin was beginning to worry about
them.
“My Lord?” a man asked. He stood beside Perrin’s horse.
Turne was a lanky fellow with curly red hair and a beard he
tied off with leather cords. He carried a warrior’s axe in a loop
at his belt, a wicked thing with a spike at the back.
“We can’t pay you much,” Perrin said. “Your men don’t have
horses?”
“No, my Lord,” Turne said, glancing at his dozen companions.
“Jarr had one. We ate it a few weeks back.” Turne smelled
unwashed and dirty, and above those scents was an odd
staleness. Had the man’s emotions gone numb? “If you don’t
mind, my Lord. Wages can wait. If you have food…well, that
will be enough for now.”
I should turn them away, Perrin thought. We already have
too many mouths to feed. Light, he was supposed to be
getting rid of people. But these fellows looked handy with their
weapons, and if he turned them away, they’d no doubt turn to
pillaging.
“Go walk down the line,” Perrin said. “Find a man named
Tam al’Thor—he’s a sturdy fellow, dressed like a farmer.
Anyone should be able to point you in his direction. Tell him
you spoke to Perrin, and I said to take you on for meals.”
The dirty men relaxed, and their lanky leader actually smelled
grateful. Grateful! Sell-swords—maybe bandits—grateful to be
taken on only for meals. That was the state of the world.
“Tell me, my Lord,” Turne said as his group began to hike
down the line of refugees. “Do you really have food?”
“We do,” Perrin said. “I just said so.”
“And it doesn’t spoil after a night left alone?”
“Course it doesn’t,” Perrin said sternly. “Not if you keep it
right.” Some of their grain might have weevils in it, but it was
edible. The man seemed to find that incredible, as if Perrin
had said his wagons would soon sprout wings and fly off for
the mountains.
“Go on now,” Perrin said. “And make sure to tell your men
that we run a tight camp. No fighting, no stealing. If I get a
whiff of you making trouble, you’ll be out on your ears.”
“Yes, my Lord,” Turne said, then hastened off to join his
men. He smelled sincere. Tam wasn’t going to be pleased to
have another batch of mercenaries to watch over, but the
Shaido were still out there somewhere. Most of them seemed
to have turned eastward. But with how slowly Perrin’s force
had been traveling, he was worried the Aiel might change their
minds and come back for him.
He nudged Stayer forward, flanked by a pair of Two Rivers
men. Now that Aram was gone, the Two Rivers men
had—unfortunately—taken it upon themselves to provide Perrin
with bodyguards. Today’s annoyances were Wil al’Seen and
Reed Soalen. Perrin had tried chewing out the men about it.
But they insisted, and he had bigger worries to bother him,
not the least of which were his strange dreams. Haunting
visions of working the forges and being unable to create
anything of worth.
Put them out of your mind, he told himself, riding up the
long column, al’Seen and Soalen keeping up. You have
nightmares enough while awake. Deal with those first.
The meadow around him was open, though the grass was
yellowing, and he noticed with displeasure several large swaths
of dead wildflowers, rotting. The spring rains had turned most
areas like this into mud traps. Moving so many refugees was
slow, even discounting the bubble of evil and the mud.
Everything took longer than he expected, including getting out
of Malden.
The force kicked up mud as it marched; most of the
refugees’ trousers and skirts were covered with it, and the air
was thick with its sticky scent. Perrin neared the front of their
line, passing riders in red breastplates, lances held high, their
helms like rimmed pots. The Winged Guards of Mayene. Lord
Gallenne rode at their front, red-plumed helm held at his side.
His bearing was formal enough that you might think he was
riding in a parade, but his single eye was keen as he scanned
the countryside. He was a good soldier. There were a lot of
good soldiers in this force, though sometimes it was tough as
bending a horseshoe to keep their hands from one another’s
throats.
“Lord Perrin!” a voice shouted. Arganda, First Captain of
Ghealdan, pushed through the Mayener lines riding a tall roan
gelding. His troops rode in a wide column beside the
Mayeners—ever since Alliandre’s return, Arganda had been set
on equal treatment. He’d complained that the Winged Guards
often rode in front. Rather than spur further arguments, Perrin
had ordered their columns to ride side by side.
“Was that another batch of mercenaries?” Arganda
demanded, pulling his horse up beside Perrin.
“A small band,” Perrin said. “Probably once the guard of
some local city’s lord.”
“Deserters.” Arganda spat to the side. “You should have sent
for me. My queen would want them strung up! Don’t forget
that we’re in Ghealdan now.”
“Your queen is my liegewoman,” Perrin said as they reached
the front of the column. “We’re not stringing anyone up unless
we have proof of their crimes. Once everyone is safely back
where they belong, you can start sorting through the
sell-swords and see if you can charge any of them. Until then,
they’re just hungry men looking for someone to follow.”
Arganda smelled frustrated. Perrin had gained a few weeks of
goodwill from him and Gallenne following the successful assault
on Malden, but old divisions were resurfacing in the endless
mud, under a sky full of tumbling thunderheads.
“Don’t worry yourself,” Perrin said. “I have men watching
over the newcomers.” He also had them watching the refugees.
Some were so docile that they would hardly go to the privy
without being instructed to do so; others kept looking over
their shoulders, as if expecting Shaido to spring from the
distant line of oaks and sweetgum trees at any moment. People
who smelled that terrified could be trouble, and the various
factions of his camp already walked as if trudging through
itchweed.
“You may send someone to talk to the newcomers, Arganda,”
Perrin said. “Talk only. Find out where they’re from, learn
whether they did serve a lord, see if they can add anything to
the maps.” They didn’t have any good maps of the area, and
had been forced to have the Ghealdanin men—Arganda
included—draw some from memory.
Arganda rode off, and Perrin moved to the front of the
column. Being in charge did have its nice moments; up here,
the smells of unwashed bodies and pungent mud weren’t
nearly so strong. Ahead, he could finally see the Jehannah
Road like a long strap of leather cutting through the highland
plains, running in a northwestern direction.
Perrin rode, lost in thought for a time. Eventually, they
reached the roadway. The mud didn’t look as bad on the road
as it had in the meadows—though if it were like any other
road Perrin had traveled on, it would have its mires and
washed-out sections. As he reached it, he noticed Gaul
approaching. The Aiel had been off scouting ahead, and as
Perrin’s horse stepped up onto the road, he noticed that
someone was riding behind Gaul up toward them.
It was Fennel, one of the farriers that Perrin had sent ahead
with Master Gill and the others. Perrin felt a wash of relief to
see him, but it was followed by worry. Where were the others?
“Lord Perrin!” the man said, riding up. Gaul stepped to the
side. Fennel was a wide-shouldered man, and carried a
long-handled workman’s axe strapped to his back. He smelled
of relief. “Praise the Light. I thought you’d never get here.
Your man says the rescue worked?”
“It did, Fennel,” Perrin said, frowning. “Where are the
others?”
“They went on ahead, my Lord,” Fennel said, bowing from
horseback. “I volunteered to stay behind, for when you caught
up. We needed to explain, you see.”
“Explain?”
“The rest turned toward Lugard,” Fennel explained. “Along
the road.”
“What?” Perrin said, frustrated. “I gave them orders to
continue northward!”
“My Lord,” Fennel said, looking abashed. “We met travelers
coming from that way; said that mud made the roads to the
north almost completely impassable for wagons or carts. Master
Gill decided that heading to Caemlyn through Lugard would be
the best way to follow your orders. Sorry, my Lord. That’s
why one of us had to stay behind.”
Light! No wonder the scouts hadn’t found Gill and the others.
They’d gone in the wrong direction. Well, after slogging through
mud for weeks himself—sometimes having to stop and wait out
storms—Perrin couldn’t blame them for deciding to take the
road. That didn’t stop him from feeling frustrated.
“How far behind are we?” Perrin asked.
“I’ve been here five days, my Lord.”
So Gill and the others had been slowed too. Well, that was
something, at least.
“Go get yourself something to eat, Fennel,” Perrin said. “And
thank you for staying behind to let me know what happened.
It was a brave thing you did, waiting alone for so long.”
“Somebody had to do it, my Lord.” He hesitated. “Most
feared you hadn’t…well, that things had gone wrong, my Lord.
You see, we figured you’d be faster than us, since we had
those carts. But from the look of things here, you decided to
bring the entire town with you!”
It wasn’t far from the truth, unfortunately. He waved Fennel
on.
“I found him about an hour along the road,” Gaul said softly.
“Beside a hill that would make an excellent camp. Well watered,
with a good view of the surrounding area.”
Perrin nodded. They’d have to decide what to do—wait until
Grady and Neald could make large gateways, follow along after
Master Gill and the others on foot, or send most people
northward and send only a few toward Lugard. Regardless of
the decision, it would be good to camp for the day and sort
through things. “Pass the word to the others, if you will,”
Perrin said to Gaul. “We’ll hike down the road to the place
you found, then discuss what to do next. And ask some of the
Maidens if they’d scout along the road in the other direction to
make sure we’re not going to be surprised by anyone moving
up the road behind us.”
Gaul nodded and moved off to pass the word. Perrin
remained sitting atop Stayer, thinking. He had half a mind to
send Arganda and Alliandre off to the northwest right now,
setting on a path to Jehannah. But the Maidens had picked
out some Shaido scouts watching his army. Those were
probably there to make sure Perrin wasn’t a threat, but they
made him uneasy. These were dangerous times.
It was best to keep Alliandre and her people with him for
now, both for her safety and his own, at least until Grady and
Neald recovered. The snakebites from the bubble of evil had
affected the two of them and Masuri—the only one of the Aes
Sedai who had been bitten—worse than the others.
Still, Grady was starting to look hale again. Soon he’d be able
to make a gateway large enough to move the army through.
Then Perrin could send Alliandre and the Two Rivers men
home. He himself could Travel back to Rand, pretend to make
up—most people would still think that he and Rand had parted
ways angrily—and then finally be rid of Berelain and her
Winged Guards. Everything could go back to the way it should
be.
Light send it all went that easily. He shook his head,
dispelling the swirling colors and visions that appeared to his
eyes whenever he thought of Rand.
Nearby, Berelain and her force were marching out onto the
road, looking very pleased to reach some solid footing. The
beautiful dark-haired woman wore a fine green dress and a
belt of firedrops. Her neckline was discomfortingly low. He’d
started relying on her during Faile’s absence, once she’d
stopped treating him like a prize boar to be hunted and
skinned.
Faile was back now, and it appeared his truce with Berelain
was over. As usual, Annoura rode near her, though she didn’t
spend the time chatting with Berelain as she once had. Perrin
never had figured out why she’d been meeting with the
Prophet. Probably never would, considering what had happened
to Masema. A day out of Malden, Perrin’s scouts had run
across a group of corpses that had been killed with arrows
and robbed of their shoes, belts, and any valuables. Though
ravens had gotten the eyes, Perrin had smelled Masema’s scent
through the rot.
The Prophet was dead, killed by bandits. Well, perhaps that
was a fitting end for him, but Perrin still felt he’d failed. Rand
had wanted Masema brought to him. The colors swirled again.
Either way, it was time for Perrin to return to Rand. The
colors swirled, showing Rand standing in front of a building
with a burned front, staring westward. Perrin banished the
image.
His duty was done, the Prophet seen to, Alliandre’s allegiance
secure. Only, Perrin felt as if something were still very wrong.
He fingered the blacksmith’s puzzle in his pocket. To
understand something…you have to figure out its parts…
He smelled Faile before she reached him, heard her horse on
the soft earth. “So, Gill turned toward Lugard?” she asked,
stopping beside him.
He nodded.
“That may have been wise. Perhaps we should turn that way
too. Were those more sell-swords who joined us?”
“Yes.”
“We must have picked up five thousand people these last few
weeks,” she said thoughtfully. “Perhaps more. Odd, in this
desolate landscape.”
She was beautiful, with her raven hair and strong features—a
good Saldaean nose set between two tilted eyes. She was
dressed for riding in deep wine red. He loved her dearly, and
praised the Light that he’d gotten her back. Why did he feel
so awkward around her now?
“You’re troubled, my husband,” she noted. She understood
him so well, it was almost as if she could read scents. It
seemed to be a thing of women, though. Berelain could do it
too.
“We’ve gathered too many people,” he said with a grunt. “I
should start turning them away.”
“I suspect they’d find their way back to our force anyway.”
“Why should they? I could leave orders.”
“You can’t give orders to the Pattern itself, my husband.” She
glanced over at the column of people as they moved onto the
road.
“What do—” He cut off, catching her meaning. “You think
this is me? Being ta’veren
?”
“Every stop along our trip, you’ve gained more followers,”
Faile said. “Despite our losses against the Aiel, we came out of
Malden with a stronger force than when we started. Haven’t
you found it odd that so many of the former gai’shain are
taking to Tam’s training with weapons?”
“They were beaten down so long,” Perrin said. “They want to
stop that from happening again.”
“And so coopers learn the sword,” Faile said, “and find they
have a talent for it. Masons who never thought of fighting
back against the Shaido now train with the quarterstaff.
Sell-swords and armsmen flock to us.”
“It’s coincidence.”
“Coincidence?” She sounded amused. “With a ta’veren at the
army’s head?”
She was right, and as he fell silent, he could smell her
satisfaction at winning the argument. He didn’t think of it as
an argument, but she’d see it as one. If anything, she’d be
mad that he hadn’t raised his voice.
“This is all going to end in a few days, Faile,” he said. “Once
we have gateways again, I’ll send these people to their proper
places. I’m not gathering an army. I’m helping some refugees
to get home.” The last thing he needed was more people
calling him “my Lord” and bowing and scraping.
“We shall see,” she said.
“Faile.” He sighed and lowered his voice. “A man’s got to see
a thing for what it is. No sense in calling a buckle a hinge or
calling a nail a horseshoe. I’ve told you; I’m not a good leader.
I proved that.”
“That’s not how I see it.”
He gripped the blacksmith’s puzzle in his pocket. They’d
discussed this during the weeks since Malden, but she refused
to see sense. “The camp was a mess while you were gone,
Faile! I’ve told you how Arganda and the Maidens nearly killed
one another. And Aram—Masema corrupted him right under
my nose. The Aes Sedai played at games I can’t guess, and
the Two Rivers men…you see how they look at me with
shame in their eyes.”
Faile’s scent spiked with anger when he said that, and she
turned sharply toward Berelain.
“It’s not her fault,” Perrin said. “If I’d been able to think of
it, I’d have stopped the rumors dead. But I didn’t. Now I’ve
got to sleep in the bed I made for myself. Light! What is a
man if his own neighbors don’t think well of him? I’m no lord,
Faile, and that’s that. I’ve proven it soundly.”
“Odd,” she said. “But I’ve been speaking to the others, and
they tell a different story. They say that you kept Arganda
contained and put out flare-ups in camp. Then there’s the
alliance with the Seanchan; the more I learn of that, the more
impressed I am. You acted decisively in a time of great
uncertainty, you focused everyone’s efforts, and you
accomplished the impossible in taking Malden. Those are the
actions of a leader.”
“Faile…” he said, suppressing a growl. Why wouldn’t she
listen? When she’d been a captive, nothing had mattered to
him but recovering her. Nothing. It didn’t matter who had
needed his help, or what orders he’d been given. Tarmon
Gai’don itself could have started, and he’d have ignored it in
order to find Faile.
He realized now how dangerous his actions had been.
Trouble was, he’d take those same actions again. He didn’t
regret what he’d done, not for a moment. A leader couldn’t be
like that.
He never should have let them raise that wolfhead banner in
the first place. Now that he’d completed his tasks, now that
Faile was back, it was time to put all of that foolishness behind
him. Perrin was a blacksmith. It didn’t matter what Faile
dressed him in, or what titles people gave him. You couldn’t
make a drawknife into a horseshoe by painting it, or by calling
it something different.
He turned to the side, where Jori Congar rode before the
column, that blasted red wolfhead banner flapping proudly from
a pole taller than a cavalryman’s lance. Perrin opened his
mouth to shout for him to take it down, but Faile spoke
suddenly.
“Yes, indeed,” she said, musingly. “I’ve been thinking on this
for the last few weeks, and—odd though it seems—I believe my
captivity may have been precisely what we needed. Both of
us.”
What? Perrin turned to her, smelling her thoughtfulness. She
believed what she’d said.
“Now,” Faile said, “we need to speak of—”
“Scouts returning,” he said, perhaps more abruptly than he
intended. “Aiel up ahead.”
Faile glanced as he pointed, but of course she couldn’t see
anything yet. She knew of his eyes, though. She was one of
the few who did.
The call went up as others noticed the three figures in
cadin’sor approaching alongside the road, the ones Perrin had
sent to scout. Two Maidens hurried for the Wise Ones and
one loped up to Perrin.
“There is something beside the road, Perrin Aybara,” the
woman said. She smelled concerned. That was a dangerous
sign. “It is something that you will wish to see.”
Galad woke to the sound of a tent flap rustling. Sharp pains
burned at his side where he had been repeatedly kicked; they
matched the duller aches on his shoulder, left arm, and thigh
where he’d been wounded by Valda. His pounding headache
was almost strong enough to drown out all else.
He groaned, rolling onto his back. All was dark around him,
but pinprick lights shone in the sky. Stars? It had been
overcast for so long.
No…something was wrong about them. His head pulsed with
pain, and he blinked tears from the corner of his eyes. Those
stars looked so faint, so distant. They made no familiar
patterns. Where could Asunawa have taken him that the very
stars were different?
As his mind cleared, he began to make out his surroundings.
This was a heavy sleeping tent, constructed to be dark during
the daylight hours. The lights above weren’t stars at all, but
sunlight through the occasional pinholes of wear in the canvas.
He was still naked, and with tentative fingers he determined
that there was dried blood on his face. It had come from a
long gash in his forehead. If he didn’t wash it soon, infection
was likely. He lay on his back, breathing in and out with care.
If he took in too much air at once, his side screamed.
Galad did not fear death or pain. He had made the right
choices. It was unfortunate that he’d needed to leave the
Questioners in charge; they were controlled by the Seanchan.
However, there had been no other option, not after he’d
walked into Asunawa’s hands.
Galad felt no anger at the scouts who had betrayed him. The
Questioners were a valid source of authority in the Children,
and their lies had no doubt been convincing. No, the one he
was angry at was Asunawa, who took what was true and
muddied it. There were many who did that in the world, but
the Children should be different.
Soon the Questioners would come for him, and then the true
price for saving his men would be exacted with their hooks
and knives. He had been aware of that price when he’d made
his decision. In a way, he had won, for he had manipulated
the situation best.
The other way to ensure his victory was to hold to the truth
under their questioning. To deny being a Darkfriend with his
final breath. It would be difficult, but it would be right.
He forced himself to sit up, expecting—and weathering—the
dizziness and nausea. He felt around. His legs were chained
together, and that chain was locked to a spike that had been
driven deep into the earth, piercing the rough canvas tent
bottom.
He tried yanking it free, just in case. He pulled so hard that
his muscles failed him and he nearly passed out. Once he had
recovered, he crawled to the side of the tent. His chains gave
him enough room to reach the flaps. He took one of the cloth
ties—used to hold the flaps up when they were opened—and
spat on it. Then, methodically, he wiped the grime and blood
from his face.
The cleaning gave him a goal, kept him moving and stopped
him from thinking about the pain. He carefully scrubbed the
crusted blood from his cheek and nose. It was difficult; his
mouth was dry. He bit down on his tongue to get saliva. The
strips were not canvas, but a lighter material. They smelled of
dust.
He spat on a fresh section, then worked the spittle into the
cloth. The wound to his head, the dirt on his face…these things
were marks of victory for the Questioners. He would not leave
them. He would go into their tortures with a clean face.
He heard shouts outside. Men preparing to break down the
camp. Would that delay their questioning? He doubted it.
Striking camp could take hours. Galad continued cleaning,
soiling the lengths of both straps, using the work as a kind of
ritual, a rhythmic pattern to give him a focus for meditation.
His headache withdrew, the pains of his body becoming less
significant.
He would not run. Even if he could escape, fleeing would
invalidate his bargain with Asunawa. But he would face his
enemies with self-respect.
As he finished, he heard voices outside the tent. They were
coming for him. He scrabbled quietly back to the stake in the
ground. Taking a deep breath despite the pain, he rolled onto
his knees. Then he took the top of the iron spike in his left
hand and pushed, heaving himself to his feet.
He wobbled, then steadied himself, standing up all the way.
His pains were nothing, now. He had felt insect bites that were
worse. He put his feet wide in a warrior’s stance, his hands
held before himself with his wrists crossed. He opened his eyes,
back straight, staring at the tent flaps. It wasn’t the cloak, the
uniform, the heraldry, or the sword that made a man. It was
the way he held himself.
The flaps rustled, then drew open. The outside light was
brilliant to Galad’s eyes, but he did not blink. He did not flinch.
Silhouettes moved against an overcast sky. They hesitated,
backlit. He could tell they were surprised to see him standing
there.
“Light!” one exclaimed. “Damodred, how is it that you’re
awake?” Unexpectedly, the voice was familiar.
“Trom?” Galad asked, his voice ragged.
Men spilled into the room. As his eyes adjusted, Galad made
out stocky Trom, along with Bornhald and Byar. Trom fumbled
with a set of keys.
“Stop!” Galad said. “I gave orders to you three. Bornhald,
there is blood on your cloak! I commanded you not to try to
free me!”
“Your men obeyed your orders, Damodred,” a new voice
said. Galad looked up to see three men entering the room:
Berab Golever, tall and bearded; Alaabar Harnesh, his bald,
shadowed head missing its left ear; Brandel Vordarian, a blond
hulk of a man from Galad’s native Andor. All three were Lords
Captain, all three had stood with Asunawa.
“What is this?” Galad asked them.
Harnesh opened a sack and dumped something bulbous to
the ground in front of Galad. A head.
Asunawa’s.
All three men drew swords and knelt before him, the points
of their weapons stabbing the canvas. Trom unlocked the
manacles at Galad’s feet.
“I see,” Galad said. “You have turned your swords on fellow
Children.”
“What would you have had us do?” Brandel asked, looking
up from his kneeling position.
Galad shook his head. “I do not know. Perhaps you are
right; I should not chide you on this choice. It may have been
the only one you could have made. But why did you change
your minds?”
“We have lost two Lords Captain Commander in under half a
year,” Harnesh said in a gruff voice. “The Fortress of the Light
has become a playground for the Seanchan. The world is in
chaos.”
“And yet,” Golever said, “Asunawa marched us all the way
out here to have us battle our fellow Children. It was not right,
Damodred. We all saw how you presented yourself, we all saw
how you stopped us from killing one another. Faced with that,
and with the High Inquisitor naming as Darkfriend a man we
all know to be honorable…Well, how could we not turn against
him?”
Galad nodded. “You accept me as Lord Captain
Commander?”
The three men bowed their heads. “All the Lords Captain are
for you,” Golever said. “We were forced to kill a third of those
who wore the red shepherd’s crook of the Hand of the Light.
Some others united with us; some tried to flee. The Amadicians
did not interfere, and many have said they’d rather join with
us than return to the Seanchan. We have the other
Amadicians—and the Questioners who tried to run—held at
swordpoint.”
“Let free those who wish to leave,” Galad said. “They may
return to their families and their masters. By the time they
reach the Seanchan, we will be beyond their grasp.”
The men nodded.
“I accept your allegiance,” Galad said. “Gather the other Lords
Captain and fetch me supply reports. Strike camp. We march
for Andor.”
None of them asked whether he needed rest, though Trom
did look worried. Galad accepted the white robe a Child
brought to him, and then sat in a hastily supplied chair as
another—Child Candeiar, a man expert in wounds—entered to
inspect his injuries.
Galad didn’t feel wise or strong enough to bear the title he
did. But the Children had made their decision.
The Light would protect them for it.