Rand slipped on his blood.
He couldn’t see. He carried something. Something heavy. A
body. He stumbled up the tunnel.
Closing, he thought. It’s closing. The ceiling lowered like a
shutting jaw, stone grinding against stone. With a gasp, Rand
reached open air as the rocks slammed down behind him,
locking together like clenched teeth.
Rand tripped. The body in his arms was so heavy. He
slipped to the ground.
He could … see, just faintly. A figure kneeling down beside
him. “Yes,” a woman whispered. He did not recognize the
voice. “Yes, that’s good. That is what you need to do.”
He blinked, his vision fuzzy. Was that Aiel clothing? An old
woman, with gray hair? Her form retreated, and Rand reached
toward her, not wanting to be alone. Wanting to explain
himself. “I see the answer now,” he whispered. “I asked the
Aelfinn the wrong question. To choose is our fate. If you have
no choice, then you aren’t a man at all. You’re a puppet…”
Shouting.
Rand felt heavy. He plunged into unconsciousness.
*   *   *
Mat stood up as the mist of Mashadar burned away from him
and vanished. The field was littered with the bodies of those
eerie pockmarked Trollocs. He looked upward through the
vanishing wisps and found the sun directly overhead.
“Well, you’re a sight,” he said to it. “You should come out
more often. You have a pretty face.” He smiled, then looked
down at the dead man by his feet. Padan Fain looked like a
bundle of sticks and moss, the flesh slipping from his bones.
The blackness of the dagger had spread across his rotting skin.
It stank.
Almost, Mat reached for that dagger. Then he spat. “For
once,” he said, “a gamble I don’t want to touch.” He turned
his back on it and walked off.
Three steps away, he found his hat. He grinned, snatched it
up and set it on his head, then began whistling as he rested
the ashandarei on his shoulder and strolled away. The dice
had stopped rolling in Mat’s head.
Behind, the dagger, ruby and all, melted away into the mess
that had been Padan Fain.
*   *   *
Perrin walked wearily into the camp they had set up at the
base of Shayol Ghul after the fighting had ceased. He dropped
his coat. The air felt good on his bare chest. He tucked
Mah’alleinir away in its place at his belt. A good smith never
neglected his tools, for all that sometimes, carrying them felt as
if they would bear him down to the grave itself.
He thought that he could sleep a hundred days straight.
But not yet. Not yet.
Faile.
No. Deep down, he knew he had to face something
horrible about her. But not yet. For the moment, he shoved
that worry—that terror—away.
The last spirits of the wolves faded back into the wolf
dream.
Farewell, Young Bull.
Find what you seek, Young Bull.
The hunt ends, but we will hunt again, Young Bull.
Perrin plodded among rows of wounded men and Aiel
celebrating the defeat of the Shadowspawn. Some tents were
filled with moans, others with yells of victory. People of all
stripes ran through the now-blooming valley of Thakan’dar,
some hunting for the wounded, others crying in joy and
whooping as they met with friends who had survived the last,
dark moments.
Aiel called to Perrin, “Ho, blacksmith, join us!” But he did
not enter their celebrations. He looked for the guards. Someone
around here had to be levelheaded enough to worry about a
rogue Myrddraal or Draghkar taking the opportunity to try for
a little revenge. Sure enough, he found a ring of defenders at
the center of camp guarding a large tent. What of Rand?
No colors swirled in his vision. No image of Rand. Perrin
felt no more tugging, pulling him in any direction.
Those seemed like very bad signs.
He pushed through the guards, numb, and entered the tent.
Where had they found a tent this large on this battlefield?
Everything had been trampled, blown away or burned.
The inside smelled of herbs, and was partitioned with
several hanging cloths.
“I’ve tried everything,” a voice whispered. Damer Flinn’s
voice. “Nothing changes what is happening. He—”
Perrin pushed in on Nynaeve and Flinn standing beside a
pallet behind one of the partitions. Rand, cleaned and dressed,
lay there, eyes closed. Moiraine knelt beside him, her hand on
his face, whispering so softly none but he could hear. “You did
well, Rand. You did well.”
“He lives?” Perrin asked, wiping the sweat from his face
with his hand.
“Perrin!” Nynaeve said. “Oh, Light. You look horrible. Sit
down, you lummox! You’re going to fall over. I don’t want two
of you to tend.”
Her eyes were red. “He’s dying anyway, isn’t he?” Perrin
asked. “You got him out alive, but he’s still going to die.”
“Sit,” Nynaeve commanded, pointing to a stool.
“Dogs obey that command, Nynaeve,” Perrin said, “not
wolves.” He knelt down, resting a hand on Rand’s shoulder.
I couldn’t feel your tugging, or see the visions, Perrin
thought. You’re no longer ta’veren. I suspect neither am I.
“Have you sent for the three?” Perrin asked. “Min, Elayne,
Aviendha. They need to visit him a last time.”
“That’s all you can say?” Nynaeve snapped.
He looked up at her. The way she folded her arms made
her look as if she were holding herself together. Wrapping her
arms about herself to stop from crying.
“Who else died?” Perrin asked, bracing himself. It was
obvious from her expression. She had lost one already.
“Egwene.”
Perrin closed his eyes, breathing out. Egwene. Light.
No masterwork comes without a price, he thought. That
doesn’t mean it’s not worth forging. Still … Egwene?
“It’s not your fault, Nynaeve,” he said, opening his eyes.
“Of course it’s not. I know it’s not, you numb-brained fool.”
She turned away.
He stood up, embracing her and patting her back with his
smith’s hands. “I’m sorry.”
“I left … to save you,” Nynaeve whispered. “I only came
along to protect you.”
“You did, Nynaeve. You protected Rand so he could do
what he had to do.”
She shook, and he let her weep. Light. He shed a few
tears himself. Nynaeve pulled away sharply after a moment,
then barreled out of the tent.
“I tried,” Flinn said desperately, looking at Rand. “Nynaeve
did, too. Together, we tried, with Moiraine Sedai’s angreal.
Nothing worked. Nobody knows how to save him.”
“You did what you could,” Perrin said, peeking around the
next partition. Another man lay on the pallet there. “What is
he doing here?”
“We found them together,” Flinn said. “Rand must have
carried him out of the pit. We don’t know why the Lord
Dragon would save one of the Forsaken, but it doesn’t matter.
We can’t Heal him either. They’re dying. Both of them.”
“Send for Min, Elayne and Aviendha,” Perrin said again. He
hesitated. “Did they all survive?”
“The Aiel girl took a beating,” Flinn said. “She came
stumbling into camp, half-carried by a horrid-looking Aes Sedai
who had made a gateway for her. She’ll live, though I don’t
know how well she’ll walk in years to come.”
“Let them know. All of them.”
Flinn nodded, and Perrin stepped out after Nynaeve. He
found what he’d hoped to see, the reason why she’d left so
quickly. Just outside the tent, Lan held her tightly. The man
looked as bloodied and tired as Perrin felt. Their eyes met, and
they nodded to one another.
“Several of the Windfinders have opened a gateway between
here and Merrilor,” Lan said to Perrin. “The Dark One is
sealed away again. The Blasted Lands are blooming, and
gateways can open here again.”
“Thank you,” Perrin said, passing him by. “Has anyone …
heard anything about Faile?”
“No, blacksmith. The Hornsounder saw her last, but she left
him and entered the battlefield to draw the Trollocs away from
him. I’m sorry.”
Perrin nodded. He’d already spoken with Mat, and Olver. It
seemed to him that … that he’d been avoiding thinking about
what must have happened.
Don’t think about it, he told himself. Don’t you dare. He
steeled himself, then went to seek the gateway Lan had
mentioned.
*   *   *
“Excuse me,” Loial asked the Maidens sitting beside the tent.
“Have you seen Matrim Cauthon?”
“
Oosquai
?” one of them asked, laughing, holding up the
skin.
“No, no,” Loial said. “I have to find Matrim Cauthon and
get his account of the battle, you see. While it’s fresh. I need
everyone to tell me what they saw and heard, so that I can
write it down. There will never be a better time.”
And, he admitted to himself, he wanted to see Mat and
Perrin. See that they were all right. So much had happened;
he wanted to talk to his friends and make certain they were
well. With what was happening to Rand …
The Aiel woman smiled at him drunkenly. Loial sighed, then
continued through the camp. The day was coming to an end.
The day of the Last Battle! It was the Fourth Age now, wasn’t
it? Could an age start in the middle of a day? That would be
inconvenient for the calendars, wouldn’t it? But everyone
agreed. Rand had sealed the Bore at noon.
Loial continued through the camp. They hadn’t moved from
the base of Shayol Ghul. Nynaeve said she was too worried to
move Rand. Loial kept searching, peeking into tents. In the
next, he found the grizzled general Ituralde, surrounded by four
Aes Sedai.
“Look,” Ituralde said. “I’ve served the kings of Arad Doman
all of my life. I swore oaths.”
“Alsalam is dead,” Saerin Sedai said from beside the chair.
“Someone has to take the throne.”
“There is confusion in Saldaea,” Elswell Sedai added. “The
succession is messy, with the ties it has to Andor now. Arad
Doman cannot afford to be leaderless. You must take the
throne, Rodel Ituralde. You must do it quickly.”
“The Merchant Council…”
“All dead or vanished,” another Aes Sedai said.
“I swore oaths…”
“And what would your king have you do?” Yukiri Sedai
asked. “Let the kingdom disintegrate? You must be strong,
Lord Ituralde. This is not a time for Arad Doman to be
without a leader.”
Loial slipped away and shook his head, feeling sorry for the
man. Four Aes Sedai. Ituralde would be crowned before the
day was out.
Loial stopped by the main Healing tent again to check if
anyone had seen Mat. He had been to this battlefield, and
people said he was smiling and healthy, but … well, Loial
wanted to see for himself. Wanted to talk to him.
Inside the tent, Loial had to slouch lest he brush his head
on the ceiling. A large tent for humans was small by Ogier
standards.
He peeked in on Rand. His friend looked worse than
before. Lan stood by the wall. He wore a crown—it was just a
simple silver band—where the hadori used to rest. That wasn’t
odd, but the matching one Nynaeve wore did give Loial a start.
“It’s not fair,” Nynaeve whispered. “Why should he die,
when the other one gets better?”
Nynaeve seemed troubled. She still had red eyes, but
before, she had chivvied anyone who mentioned them, so Loial
said nothing. Humans often seemed to want him to say
nothing, which was odd for people who lived lives so hastily.
She looked at Loial, and he bowed his head to her.
“Loial,” she said. “How goes your search?”
“Not well,” he said with a grimace. “Perrin ignored me and
Mat cannot be found.”
“Your stories can wait a few days, Builder,” Lan said.
Loial did not argue. Lan was a king now, after all. But …
no, the stories could not wait. They had to be fresh so his
history could be accurate.
“It’s terrible,” Flinn said, still looking at Rand. “But, Nynaeve
Sedai … It’s so strange. None of the three seem to care at all.
Shouldn’t they be more worried…?”
Loial left them, though he did check in on Aviendha in a
nearby tent. She sat while several women attended to her
twisted, bleeding feet. She had lost several of her toes. She
nodded her head to Loial; the Healings done so far had
apparently taken away her pain, for though she seemed tired,
she did not seem in agony.
“Mat?” he asked hopefully.
“I have not seen him, Loial, son of Arent son of Halan,”
Aviendha replied. “At least, not since you asked a short time
ago.”
Loial blushed, then left her. He passed Elayne and Min
outside. He would get their stories—he had already asked a few
questions—but the three ta’veren
 … they were most important!
Why were humans always bustling around so quickly, never
sitting still? Never any time to think. This was an important
day.
It was odd, though. Min and Elayne. Shouldn’t they be at
Rand’s side? Elayne seemed to be taking reports on casualties
and refugee supplies, and Min sat looking up at Shayol Ghul, a
far-off expression in her eyes. Neither went in to hold Rand’s
hand as he slipped toward death.
Well, Loial thought, maybe Mat sneaked by me and went
back to Merrilor. Never staying put, these men. Always so
hasty …
*   *   *
Matrim Cauthon sauntered into the Seanchan camp on the
south side of Merrilor, away from the piles of the dead.
All around, Seanchan men and women gasped, hands to
their mouths. He tipped his hat to them.
“The Prince of the Ravens!” Hushed tones moved through
camp ahead of him, passing from mouth to mouth like the last
bottle of brandy on a cold night.
He walked right up to Tuon, who stood at a large map
table at the camp center talking to Selucia. Karede, Mat
noticed, had survived. The man probably felt guilty about it.
Tuon looked at Mat and frowned. “Where have you been?”
Mat raised his arm, and Tuon frowned, looking upward at
nothing. Mat spun and thrust his hand farther toward the sky.
Nightflowers began to explode high above the camp.
Mat grinned. Aludra had taken a little convincing, but only a
little. She did so like to make things explode.
It was not truly dusk yet, but the show was still grand.
Aludra now had half of the dragoners trained to build
fireworks and handle her powders. She seemed far less
secretive than she once had.
The sounds of the display washed over them.
“Fireworks?” Tuon said.
“The best bloody firework show in the history of my land
or yours,” Mat said.
Tuon frowned. The explosions reflected in her dark eyes.
“I’m with child,” she said. “The Doomseer has confirmed it.”
Mat felt a jolt, as sure as if a firework had gone off inside
of his stomach. An heir. A son, no doubt! What odds that it
was a boy? Mat forced a grin. “Well, I guess I’m off the hook,
now. You have an heir.”
“I have an heir,” Tuon said, “but I am the one off that
hook. Now I can kill you, if I want.”
Mat felt his grin widen. “Well, we’ll have to see what we
can work out. Tell me, do you ever play dice?”
*   *   *
Perrin sat down among the dead and finally started weeping.
Gai’shain in white and city women picked through the
dead. There was no sign of Faile. None at all.
I can’t keep going. How long had it been since he’d slept?
That one night in Mayene. His body complained that it hadn’t
been nearly enough. He’d pushed himself long before that,
spending the equivalent of weeks in the wolf dream.
Lord and Lady Bashere were dead. Faile would have been
queen, if she’d lived. Perrin shook and trembled, and he could
not make himself move any more. There were hundreds of
thousands of dead on this battlefield. The other searchers
ignored a body if it had no life, marking it and moving on. He
had tried to spread the word for them to seek Faile, but the
searchers had to look for the living.
Fireworks exploded in the darkening sky. Perrin buried his
head in his hands, then felt himself slide sideways and collapse
among the corpses.
*   *   *
Moghedien winced at the display in the sky. Each explosion
made her see that deadly fire again, tearing through the
Sharans. That flare of light, that moment of panic.
And then … and then darkness. She’d awakened some time
later, left for dead among the bodies of Sharans. When she’d
come to, she had found these fools all across the battlefield,
claiming to have won the day.
Claiming? she thought, wincing again as another round of
fireworks sounded. The Great Lord has fallen. All was lost.
No. No. She continued forward, keeping her step firm,
unsuspicious. She had strangled a worker, then taken her form,
channeling only a tiny bit and inverting the weave. That should
let her escape from this place. She wove around bodies,
ignoring the stink to the air.
All was not lost. She still lived. And she was of the Chosen!
That meant … that meant that she was an empress among her
lessers. Why, the Great Lord was imprisoned again, so he
could not punish her. And certainly most, if not all, of the
other Chosen were dead or imprisoned. If that were true, no
one could rival her in knowledge.
This might actually work out. This might be a victory
. She
stopped beside an overturned supply cart, clutching her
cour’souvra—it was still whole, thankfully. She smiled with a
wide grin, then wove a small light to illuminate her way.
Yes … Look at the open sky, not the thunderclouds. She
could turn this to her advantage. Why … in the matter of a
few years, she could be ruling the world herself!
Something cold snapped around her neck.
Moghedien reached up with horror, then screamed. “No!
Not again!” Her disguise melted away and the One Power left
her.
A smug-looking sul’dam stood behind. “They said we could
not take any who called themselves Aes Sedai. But you, you
do not wear one of their rings, and you skulk like one who
has done something wrong. I do not think you will be missed
at all.”
“Free me!” Moghedien said, scratching at the a’dam. “Free
me, you—”
Pain sent her to the ground, writhing.
“I am called Shanan,” the sul’dam said as another woman
approached, a damane in tow. “But you may call me mistress.
I think that we should return to Ebou Dar quickly.”
Her companion nodded, and the damane made a gateway.
They had to drag Moghedien through.
*   *   *
Nynaeve emerged from the Healing tent at Shayol Ghul. The
sun was almost below the horizon.
“He’s dead,” she whispered to the small crowd gathered
outside.
Saying the words felt like dropping a brick onto her own
feet. She did not cry. She had shed those tears already. That
did not mean that she didn’t hurt.
Lan came out of the tent behind her, putting an arm
around her shoulders. She raised her hand to his. Nearby, Min
and Elayne looked at one another.
Gregorin whispered to Darlin—he had been found, half dead,
in the wreckage of his tent. Both of them frowned at the
women. Nynaeve overheard part of what Gregorin said. “…
expected the Aiel savage to be heartless, and maybe the Queen
of Andor, but the other one? Not a tear.”
“They’re shocked,” Darlin replied.
No, Nynaeve thought, studying Min and Elayne. Those three
know something I do not. I’ll have to beat it out of them.
“Excuse me,” Nynaeve said, walking away from Lan.
He followed.
She raised an eyebrow at him.
“You shall not be rid of me in the next few weeks,
Nynaeve,” he said, love pulsing through his bond. “Even if you
want it.”
“Stubborn ox,” she grumbled. “As I recall, you are the one
who insisted on leaving me so that you could march alone
toward your presumed destiny.”
“And you were right about that,” Lan said. “As you so
often are.” He said it so calmly that it was hard to be mad at
him.
Besides, it was the women she was mad at. She chose
Aviendha first and stalked up to her, Lan by her side.
“… with Rhuarc dead,” Aviendha was saying to Sorilea and
Bair, “I think that whatever I saw must be able to change. It
has already.”
“I saw your vision, Aviendha,” Bair said. “Or something like
it, through different eyes. I think it is a warning of something
we must not let happen.”
The other two nodded, then glanced at Nynaeve and grew
as still-faced as Aes Sedai. Aviendha was just as bad as the
others, completely calm as she sat in her chair, her feet
wrapped in bandages. She might walk again someday, but she
would never fight.
“Nynaeve al’Meara,” Aviendha said.
“Did you hear me say that Rand is dead?” Nynaeve
demanded. “He went silently.”
“He that was wounded has woken from the dream,”
Aviendha said evenly. “It is as all must do. His death was
accomplished in greatness, and he will be celebrated in
greatness.”
Nynaeve leaned down. “All right,” she said menacingly,
embracing the Source. “Out with it. I chose you because you
can’t run away from me.”
Aviendha displayed a moment of what might have been
fear. It was gone in a flash. “Let us prepare his pyre.”
*   *   *
Perrin ran in the wolf dream. Alone.
Other wolves howled their sorrow for his grief. After he
passed them, they would return to their celebrations, but that
did not make their empathy any less real.
He did not howl. He did not cry out. He became Young
Bull, and he ran.
He did not want to be here. He wanted slumber, true
slumber. There, he could not feel the pain. Here he could.
I shouldn’t have left her.
A thought of men. Why did it creep in!
But what could I do? I promised not to treat her like
glass.
Run. Run fast. Run until exhaustion came!
I had to go to Rand. I had to. But in doing so, I failed
her!
To the Two Rivers in a flash. Back out, along the river.
The Waste, then back, a long run toward Falme.
How could I be expected to hold them both, then let one
go?
To Tear. Then to the Two Rivers. A blur, growling, moving
as quickly as he could. Here. Here he had wed her.
Here he howled.
Caemlyn, Cairhien, Dumai’s Wells.
Here he saved one of them.
Cairhien, Ghealdan, Malden.
Here he had saved another.
Two forces in his life. Each had pulled at him. Young Bull
finally collapsed near some hills somewhere in Andor. A familiar
place.
The place where I met Elyas.
He became Perrin again. His thoughts were not wolf
thoughts, his troubles not wolf troubles. He stared up at the
sky that was now, after Rand’s sacrifice, empty of clouds. He
had wanted to be with his friend as he died.
This time, he would be with Faile where she had died.
He wanted to scream, but it would do no good. “I have to
let go, don’t I?” he whispered toward that sky. “Light. I don’t
want to. I learned. I learned from Malden. I didn’t do it again!
I did what I was supposed to, this time.”
Somewhere nearby, a bird cried in the sky. Wolves howled.
Hunting.
“I learned…”
A bird’s cry.
It sounded like a falcon.
Perrin threw himself to his feet, spinning. There. He
vanished in an instant, appearing on an open field he did not
recognize. No, he knew this field. He knew it! This was
Merrilor, only without the blood, without the grass churned to
mud, without the land blasted and broken.
Here he found a tiny falcon—as small as his hand—crying
softly, with a broken leg pinned beneath a rock. Its heartbeat
was faint.
Perrin roared as he woke, clawing his way out of the wolf
dream. He stood up on the field of bodies, shouting into the
night sky. Searchers nearby scattered in fear.
Where? In the darkness, could he find the same place? He
ran, stumbling over corpses, through pits made by channelers
or dragons. He stopped, looking one way, then another. Where.
Where!
Flowery soap. A hint of perfume in the air. Perrin dashed
toward it, throwing his weight against the corpse of an
enormous Trolloc, lying almost chest-high atop other bodies.
Beneath it, he found the carcass of a horse. Unable to truly
consider what he was doing, or of the strength it should have
required, Perrin pulled the horse aside.
Beneath, Faile lay bloodied in a small hollow in the ground,
breathing shallowly. Perrin cried out and dropped to his knees,
cradling her in his arms, breathing in her scent.
It took him only two heartbeats to shift into the wolf
dream, carry Faile to Nynaeve far to the north and shift out.
Seconds later, he felt her being Healed in his arms, unwilling to
let go of her even for that.
Faile, his falcon, trembled and stirred. Then she opened her
eyes and smiled at him.
*   *   *
The other heroes were gone. Birgitte remained as evening
approached. Nearby, soldiers prepared Rand al’Thor’s pyre.
Birgitte could not stay much longer, but for now … yes, she
could stay. A short time. The Pattern would allow it.
“Elayne?” Birgitte said. “Do you know something? About the
Dragon?”
Elayne shrugged in the waning light. The two stood at the
back of the crowd gathering to watch the Dragon Reborn’s
pyre be lit.
“I know what you’re planning,” Birgitte said to Elayne. “With
the Horn.”
“And what am I planning?”
“To keep it,” Birgitte said, “and the boy. To have it as an
Andoran treasure, perhaps a nation’s weapon.”
“Perhaps.”
Birgitte smiled. “It’s a good thing I sent him away, then.”
Elayne turned to her, ignoring those preparing Rand’s pyre.
“
What?”
“I sent Olver away,” Birgitte said. “With guards I trust. I
told Olver to find someplace nobody would look, a place he
could forget, and toss the Horn into it. Preferably the ocean.”
Elayne exhaled softly, then turned back toward the pyre.
“Insufferable woman.” She hesitated. “Thank you for saving me
from having to make that decision.”
“I thought you’d feel that way.” Actually, Birgitte had
assumed it would take a long time before Elayne understood.
But Elayne had grown in the last few weeks. “Anyway, I must
be far from insufferable, since you’ve done an excellent job of
suffering me these last months.”
Elayne turned to her again. “That sounds like a farewell.”
Birgitte smiled. She could feel it, sometimes, when it was
coming. “It is.”
Elayne looked sorrowful. “Must it be?”
“I’m being reborn, Elayne,” Birgitte whispered. “Now.
Somewhere, a woman is preparing to give birth, and I will go
to that body. It’s happening.”
“I don’t want to lose you.”
Birgitte chuckled. “Well, perhaps we will meet again. For
now, be happy for me, Elayne. This means the cycle continues.
I get to be with him again. Gaidal … I’ll be only a few years
younger than he.”
Elayne took her arm, eyes watering. “Love and peace,
Birgitte. Thank you.”
Birgitte smiled, then closed her eyes, and let herself drift
away.
*   *   *
As evening settled onto the land, Tam looked up across what
had once been the most feared place of all. Shayol Ghul. The
last flickers of light showed plants growing here, flowers
blooming, grass growing up around fallen weapons and over
corpses.
Is this your gift to us, son? he wondered. A final one?
Tam lit his torch from the small, flickering flame that
crackled in the pit nearby. He went forward, passing lines of
those who stood in the night. They had not told many of
Rand’s funeral rites. All would have wanted to come. Perhaps
all deserved to come. The Aes Sedai were planning an
elaborate memorial for Egwene; Tam preferred a quiet affair
for his son.
Rand could finally rest.
He walked past people standing with heads bowed. None
carried light save Tam. The others waited in the dark, a small
crowd of perhaps two hundred encircling the bier. Tam’s torch
flickered orange off solemn faces.
In the evening, even with his light, it was hard to tell Aiel
from Aes Sedai, Two Rivers man from Tairen king. All were
shapes in the night, saluting the body of the Dragon Reborn.
Tam went up to the bier, beside Thom and Moiraine, who
were holding hands, faces solemn. Moiraine reached over and
gently squeezed Tam’s arm. Tam looked at the corpse, gazing
down into his son’s face by the fire’s light. He did not wipe
the tears from his eyes.
You did well. My boy … you did so well.
He lit the pyre with a reverent hand.
*   *   *
Min stood at the front of the crowd. She watched Tam, with
slumped shoulders, bow his head before the flames. Eventually
the man walked back to join the Two Rivers folk. Abell
Cauthon embraced him, whispering softly to his friend.
Heads in the night, shadows, turned toward Min, Aviendha
and Elayne. They expected something from the three of them.
A show of some sort.
Solemnly, Min stepped forward with the other two; Aviendha
needed the help of two Maidens to walk, though she was able
to stand by leaning on Elayne. The Maidens withdrew to leave
the three of them alone before the pyre. Elayne and Min stood
with her, watching the fire burn, consuming Rand’s corpse.
“I’ve seen this,” Min said. “I knew it would come the day I
first met him. We three, together, here.”
Elayne nodded. “So now what?”
“Now…” Aviendha said. “Now we make sure that everyone
well and truly believes he is gone.”
Min nodded, feeling the pulsing throb of the bond in the
back of her mind. It grew stronger each moment.
*   *   *
Rand al’Thor—just Rand al’Thor—woke in a dark tent by
himself. Someone had left a candle burning beside his pallet.
He breathed deeply, stretching. He felt as if he’d just slept
long and deep. Shouldn’t he be hurting? Stiff? Aching? He felt
none of that.
He reached to his side and felt no wounds there. No
wounds. For the first time in a long while, there was no pain.
He almost didn’t know what to make of it.
Then he looked down and saw that the hand prodding his
side was his own left hand. He laughed, holding it up before
him. A mirror, he thought. I need a mirror.
He found one beyond the next partition of the tent.
Apparently, he’d been left completely alone. He held up the
candle, looking into the small mirror. Moridin’s face looked back
at him.
Rand touched his face, feeling it. In his right eye hung a
single saa
, black, shaped like the dragon’s fang. It didn’t move.
Rand slipped back into the portion of the tent where he’d
awakened. Laman’s sword was there, sitting atop a neat pile of
mixed clothing. Alivia apparently hadn’t known what he would
want to wear. She had been the one to leave these things, of
course, along with a bag of coins from a variety of nations.
She hadn’t ever cared much for either clothing or coin, but
she had known he’d need both.
She will help you die. Rand shook his head, dressing and
gathering the coins and the sword, then slipping out of the
tent. Someone had left a good horse, a dappled gelding, tied
not far away. That would do him well. From Dragon Reborn
to horsethief. He chuckled to himself. Bareback would have to
do.
He hesitated. Nearby, in the darkness, people were singing.
This was Shayol Ghul, but not as he remembered it. A
blooming Shayol Ghul, full of life.
The song they sang was a Borderlander funeral song. Rand
led the horse through the night to get a little closer. He
peered between the tents to where three women stood around
a funeral pyre.
Moridin, he thought. He’s being cremated with full honors
as the Dragon Reborn.
Rand backed away, then mounted the dapple. As he did so,
he noticed one figure who was not standing by the fire. A
solitary figure, who looked toward him when all other eyes
were turned away.
Cadsuane. She looked him up and down, eyes reflecting
firelight from the glow of Rand’s pyre. Rand nodded, waited for
a moment, then turned the horse and heeled it away.
*   *   *
Cadsuane watched him go.
Curious, she thought. Those eyes had confirmed her
suspicions. That would be information she could use. No need
to keep watching this sham of a funeral, then.
She walked away through the camp, and there strolled
directly into an ambush.
“Saerin,” she said as the women fell in around her. “Yukiri,
Lyrelle, Rubinde. What is this?”
“We would like direction,” Rubinde said.
“Direction?” Cadsuane snorted. “Ask the new Amyrlin, once
you find some poor woman to put into the position.”
The other women continued to walk with her.
As it hit her, Cadsuane stopped in place.
“Oh, blood and ashes, no!” Cadsuane said, spinning on
them. “No, no, no.”
The women smiled in an almost predatory way.
“You always talked so wisely to the Dragon Reborn of
responsibility,” Yukiri said.
“You speak of how the women of this Age need better
training,” Saerin added.
“It is a new Age,” Lyrelle said. “We have many challenges
ahead of us … and we will need a strong Amyrlin to lead us.”
Cadsuane closed her eyes, groaning.
*   *   *
Rand breathed a sigh of relief as he left Cadsuane behind. She
did not raise an alarm, though she had continued to study him
as he put distance between them. Glancing over his shoulder,
he noticed her walking off with some other Aes Sedai.
She worried him; she probably suspected something he
wished she did not. It was better than her raising an alarm,
though.
He sighed, fishing in his pocket, where he found a pipe.
Thank you, Alivia, for that, he thought, packing it with tabac
from a pouch he found in the other pocket. By instinct, he
reached for the One Power to light it.
He found nothing. No saidin in the void, nothing. He
paused, then smiled and felt an enormous relief. He could not
channel. Just to be certain, he tentatively reached for the True
Power. Nothing there either.
He regarded his pipe, riding up a little incline to the side of
Thakan’dar, now covered in plants. No way to light the tabac.
He inspected it for a moment in the darkness, then thought of
the pipe being lit. And it was.
Rand smiled and turned south. He glanced over his
shoulder. All three women at the pyre had turned from it to
look directly at him. He could make them out, though not
much else, by the light of the burning body.
I wonder which of them will follow me, he thought, then
smiled deeper. Rand al’Thor, you’ve built up quite a swelled
head, haven’t you? Assuming that one, or more, would
follow.
Maybe none of them would. Or maybe all of them would,
in their own time. He found himself chuckling.
Which would he pick? Min … but no, to leave Aviendha?
Elayne. No. He laughed. He couldn’t pick. He had three
women in love with him, and didn’t know which he would like
to have follow him. Any of them. All of them. Light, man.
You’re hopeless. Hopelessly in love with all three, and
there’s no way out of it.
He heeled the horse into a canter, heading farther south.
He had a purse full of coin, a good horse and a strong
sword. Laman’s sword, which was a better sword than he’d
have wanted. It might draw attention. It was a true
heron-marked sword with a fine blade.
Did Alivia realize how much money she’d given him? She
didn’t know a thing about coins. She’d probably stolen the lot
of it, so he wasn’t just a horsethief. Well, he’d told her to get
him some gold, and she’d done it. He could buy an entire
farm in the Two Rivers with what he carried.
South. East or west would do, but he figured he wanted to
go someplace away from it all for good. South first, then
maybe out west, along the coast. Maybe he could find a ship?
There was so much of the world he hadn’t seen. He’d
experienced a few battles, he’d gotten caught up in a huge
Game of Houses. Many things he hadn’t wanted anything to
do with. He’d seen his father’s farm. And palaces. He’d seen a
lot of palaces.
He just had not had the leisure to have a real look at
much of the world. That will be new, he thought. Traveling
without being chased, or having to rule here or there. Traveling
where he could just sleep in a barn in exchange for splitting
someone’s firewood. He thought about that, and found himself
laughing, riding on south and smoking his impossible pipe. As
he did so, a wind rose up around him, around the man who
had been called lord, Dragon Reborn, king, killer, lover and
friend.
The wind rose high and free, to soar in an open sky with
no clouds. It passed over a broken landscape scattered with
corpses not yet buried. A landscape covered, at the same time,
with celebrations. It tickled the branches of trees that had
finally begun to put forth buds.
The wind blew southward, through knotted forests, over
shimmering plains and toward lands unexplored. This wind, it
was not the ending. There are no endings, and never will be
endings, to the turning of the Wheel of Time.
But it was an ending.